Systemic stablecoin and the brave new world of digital money
Jamie Morgan

New forms of money invite informed speculation regarding future possibil- ities. In this extended commentary, we explore five issue-areas that the growth of cryptocurrency and, more particularly, stablecoin have evoked. This new form of digital money has the potential to change the form and functioning of payments technologies and thus alter not just how something is paid for but what can be paid for. Moreover, as the now shelved plans for Facebook/Meta’s Libra/Diem indicate, there is scope for a major corporation or coalition of corporations to issue their own stablecoin and this greatly increases the likelihood of a ‘systemic’ stablecoin. This, in turn, could change where power resides and who exercises it in banking, finance and society. Concern with power leads to issues regarding the nature of change and thus to concern with possible financial, economic and social disruptions ranging across the nature of trust, bank business models, the effectiveness of central bank policy and security of payments systems. Given these issues, cryptocurrency and stablecoin have become a growing concern for regulators and this concern extends to the case for a retail central bank digital currency (CBDC). Finally, a new form of money invites discussion of its implications for the nature of money and this leads to matters of philosophical or social theory interest.

Key words: Digital money, Bitcoin, Stablecoin, Tether, Central bank digital currency (CBDC)
JEL classifications: A1, B00, G00

1.	 Introduction
New forms of digital money invite informed speculation regarding future possibilities. In this paper, we explore several areas worthy of comment, with a focus on the poten- tial significance of ‘systemic’ stablecoin. Cryptocurrency is a form of digital currency underpinned by digital ledger technology (DLT) and made famous in recent years by Bitcoin and its peer-to-peer ‘blockchain’ cryptographic puzzle system of verification, which validates transactions in each block and rewards validators (‘miners’) with cur- rency (Nakamoto, 2008; Ali et al., 2014; BIS, 2018).1 The system does not directly
Manuscript received 14 April 2022; final version received 22 August 2022
Address for correspondence: Jamie Morgan, School of Economics, Analytics and International Business, Room-520 The Rose Bowl, Leeds Beckett University Business School, Portland Place, Leeds LS1 3HB, UK; email: j.a.morgan@leedsbeckett.ac.uk
Professor of Economics, Leeds Beckett University. Thanks to CSOG participants and Sheila Dow for provision of her work.
1 For example, as of January 2021, there were more than 7,600 different cryptocurrencies and more than 400 exchange platforms (see Sauce, 2021, p. 1). In May 2022, Coinmarket.com reported 10,043—an average growth of more than 100 new cryptocurrency per month from the January 2021 figure.
© The Author(s) 2023. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Cambridge Political Economy Society. All rights reserved.
 
rely on, or necessarily pass through the current banking system. It is open source, ‘permissionless’ and ‘non-hierarchical’ and, since the ‘token’ has no intrinsic value and it is no given organisation’s responsibility to maintain the value of the ‘token’, the value of Bitcoin (as with many other similar cryptocurrency), has varied widely. Cryptocurrency have, in general, at least so far, operated mainly as a speculative asset rather than as a means of payment (IMF, 2021; FSB, 2022, p. 9, p. 11).2 This has led to the development of ‘stablecoin’. Stablecoin is a form of cryptocurrency issued by some organisation that commits to maintaining the value of the token against a ref- erence asset, typically a fiat currency like the US$ or a basket of such currencies. The target rate is typically 1:1 and, depending on how this is achieved (see later), involves either a redemption rate or a targeted conversion rate (Arner et al., 2020). In contrast to other cryptocurrency, stablecoin are usually ‘permissioned’ and ‘hierarchical’ and may involve bank relationships for various purposes, though this needs some further explanation (again, see later).
In the last few years, stablecoin, such as Tether (₮), have grown rapidly in terms of total value of issued tokens and trading volumes, albeit stablecoin are still a small proportion of cryptocurrency compared to non-stabilised forms, which are sometimes termed ‘cryptoassets’ to distinguish them.3 However, the growth of Tether and the now abandoned plans for Meta’s Diem have raised the possibility of a rapid transition to use of stablecoin—a substitution as means of payment of stablecoin for cash and for ‘bank money’ (Diem, 2020; Knowles, 2022).4 This is one of several reasons why there is now widespread interest among academics, asset managers, regulators and super- visors in the scope for and possibilities of ‘systemic’ stablecoin, loosely defined in the literature as one that has become a significant, widespread or main means of payment (e.g. G7 WGS, 2019; FSB, 2020; Bank of England, 2021; HM Treasury, 2021).
Following a preliminary contextualising account of some key features of digital money, cryptocurrency and stablecoin, the paper will be organised to examine five issue-areas that stablecoin evokes. The first three of these focus on:
i.	The scope for stablecoin to affect the form and functioning of payments tech- nologies (creating some potentials that non-stabilised cryptocurrency/cryptoassets share, but with the added attraction of ‘stability’). The main focus here is the po- tential of micropayments, programmable money and automated payments.
ii.	The scope for stablecoin to empower/disempower existing actors in payments sys- tems and introduce new actors into those systems. Both possibilities may influ- ence where power resides and who exercises it, and this has multiple potential consequences.
iii.	The scope for stablecoin to induce disruptions through rapid change and the scope for new problematic features in newly created systems. Issues here range across effects on trust, bank business models, effectiveness of central bank policy and se- curity of the payments system.

2 For a range of analysis and relevant issues regarding cryptocurrency see also Prasad (2021); Hayes (2021); Spithoven (2019); Carney (2018); Campbell-Verduyn (2018); Weber (2016); Bjerg (2016); Hendrickson et al. (2016); Kubat (2015); Yermack (2013). See also later discussion.
3 See later discussion of money and functions for key distinctions.
4 To be clear when we use the term ‘bank money’ hereafter we are referring to retail/commercial bank money, distinguished from central bank money (otherwise termed narrow, base or high-powered money i.e., cash and the central bank reserve system). Strictly speaking, of course, both central bank money and retail/ commercial bank money are bank money. See later sections.
 
Combinations of i–iii bring digital money in general, and varieties of cryptocurrency/ cryptoassets, and systemic stablecoin in particular, into the purview of regulators, leading to a fourth area worthy of comment:
iv.	The scope for new regulation and supervisory/oversight powers designed to pre- empt, shape and respond (depending on timing and focus) to change induced by cryptocurrency.
As various analysts note, there is a complex interplay between regulation and the de- gree to which retail/commercial and universal banks are involved in and are influ- enced by stablecoin use. This involvement is, in turn, contingent—depending on how stablecoin is developed and by whom. The arising concerns, moreover, provide one (not the only) reason why states are now considering central bank digital currency (CBDC), insofar as this could (but need not, since they could both operate) provide an alternative to private provision of stablecoin (e.g. Kumhof and Noone, 2018; Bank of England, 2020, 2021).
Finally, socio-economic change invites comment on the nature of social reality, the adequacy of conceptions and the consequences of change for those conceptions. Money has, for example, been a recent focus of debate regarding social ontology (e.g. Lawson, 2016).5 As such, we turn to:
v.	The issue of what the development of stablecoin indicates about the nature of money from a philosophical or social theory perspective.
This final issue-area invites discussion of how well stablecoin fulfils the recognised functions of money (unit of account, store of value, medium of exchange), and how stablecoin allows us to makes sense of more enduring issues of what money ‘is’ as a posi- tioned something, but also, since ‘positioning’ is a process, what it suggests about money as a social technology, which changes with and in turn allows changes in, society and the economy.
As Schumpeter notes, the nature of money is a longstanding issue of debate in eco- nomics (1997 [1954]). Cryptocurrency and stablecoin are simply the latest contexts in which underlying themes can be explored. From a philosophical point of view, what money ‘is’ does not necessarily reduce to what will be used or what has been used as (or to represent) money and so this issue is not reducible to matters of either future technological possibilities or history, though clearly empirical evidence is not irrelevant for the purposes of argument. Conversely, what money ‘is’ is unlikely to be, alone, ex- planatorily insightful, since depending on its foci, it can leave a great deal unaddressed and in need of elaboration regarding the context and ramifications of a process of posi- tioning. It is important, therefore, to acknowledge that what money ‘is’ has been en- tangled with debates over real analysis versus monetary analysis, matters of the various demands for money, endogenous money, how money is created, by whom and for what purpose, as well as the role of banking within a broader finance system of asset creation, financial instruments and collateralisations (invoking matters of money hier- archies, moneyness, near money, etc.). We comment on some of these throughout the discussion. We conclude with some brief comment on the importance of not being dis- tracted by the many and varied technological and technical aspects of cryptocurrency.

5 See also Lawson (2022, 2019a, 2019b, 2018a, 2018b); Lawson and Morgan (2021a, 2021b); Elder-Vass (2021); Ingham (2018); Peacock (2017); Searle (2017); Smit et al. (2011).
 
It remains important to ask, what is finance ‘for’ i.e., what is its ‘social purpose’ (Dow, 2016, 2019; Baker, 2018; Baker and Morgan, 2021; Morgan, 2022b). Given the range of the issues and material covered here, the discussion is exploratory and indicative rather than comprehensive or complete.

2.	From Digital Money to Stablecoin: some basics
In standard categorisations digital currency are defined as those with an electronic record but no physical representation beyond this electronic inscription (for discus- sion of categories and technologies see, for example, Wadsworth, 2018; Didenko and Buckley, 2019). As noted in the introduction, cryptocurrency is a subset of digital currency.

2.1	Nonstabilised cryptocurrency
The primary distinguishing feature of cryptocurrency is the use of distributed ledger technology (DLT). This is software that can be downloaded to any computer, which then acts as a ‘node’ in a network. The network comprises a digital database (the ‘ledger’) and every computer has a copy rather than a central authority (hence ‘distrib- uted’). The DLT then requires some rule system to action updates to the ‘ledger’ and a security system to prevent tampering. Blockchain is the best known of these and so DLT and blockchain tend to be used interchangeably. It is important to note though that the technology can have multiple uses and does not reduce to cryptocurrency applications but is closely associated with them. There is, for example, interest in ‘Web3.0’—a term attributed to Gavin Wood at Ethereum, which refers to a concat- enation of new technologies operating in a decentralised fashion and freeing the web from ‘Big Tech’ (see Edelman, 2021).6 The pejorative use of ‘Big Tech’, moreover, echoes the original language used to introduce the best known cryptocurrency, Bitcoin (Nakamoto, 2008).7 A DLT network allows the creation of a payments system that by- passes banks as an intermediary (the ‘central authority’). The system is ‘peer to peer’.8 This is unlike previous electronic transactions, which pass through a bank (and related financial organisation) controlled system that authenticates and actions payment (with subsequent clearing and settling). Following Nakamoto, proponents have claimed that creating a cryptocurrency payment system could liberate society from the power of banks – trust in which was at a low ebb after the global financial crisis. In any case, Bitcoin has provided the archetypal example of a DLT blockchain cryptocurrency:


6 The technologies that blockchain DLT are built out of are, however, not entirely new. Cryptography and time stamping digital documents was mooted at least as far back as 1991 and it has been noted blockchain is similar to principles set out in Merkle-Damgard hash functions (Haber and Stornetta, 1991; Halunen et al., 2018). Ian Moll (2021) has much to say about this in regard of the general overstatement of sudden technological change.
7 When Bitcoin was first introduced the identity of Satoshi Nakamoto was not revealed and this has re-
mained a matter of interest, since whoever Nakamoto is has claim to a legacy cache of 1.1 million Bitcoin valued at $50 billion, December 2021. Since 2016, the Australian computer scientist, Craig Wright, has claimed to be Nakamoto and ‘sole inventor’ of Bitcoin. Legal claims are ongoing (though he won a landmark case in late 2021).
8 It should be noted that trading of cryptocurrency on exchanges is different than peer-to-peer transac-
tions as originally conceived and some of the literature highlights the difference between P-2-P platforms and exchanges.
 
‘1. All recent transactions that have been sent to the network are grouped together in a block and are sent to the ledger to be validated. Third party nodes decide which transactions to validate depending on which transaction offers the highest payment. These third parties are referred to as miners because they receive compensation for validating transactions (including newly issued currency [Bitcoin etc.]).9
2.	To validate transactions a miner must provide ‘proof of work’.10 This means they must find a ‘hash’, which represents all the details in the block of transactions, including each transaction’s details. A hash is a string of numbers and letters which represents an exact piece of informa- tion (such as transaction details). If the transaction details change then the hash will also be different. Therefore, hash cryptography can be used to validate the authenticity of information [this prevents ‘double-spending’ i.e., fraud, where multiple copies of the string are spent rather than a token singly and authentically transferred]. The hash is found by solving a cryptographic problem using brute computing power to guess correct answers…
3.	The ‘proof-of-work’ hash is shown to the network and the nodes on the Blockchain must then agree that the block of transactions can be added to the Blockchain—this is referred to as ‘consensus’.11
4.	Blocks are added to the Blockchain only when the majority of the network downloads the copy of the Blockchain that includes the new blocks’. (Wadsworth, 2018, p. 6)
As noted in the introduction, cryptocurrency, as a subset of digital money, tend to exhibit common features: they are ‘permissionless’ insofar as anyone can download the software and participate (and for many varieties of cryptocurrency the software is open source and can be modified, though this is not a simple process), ‘public’ insofar as any ‘node’ can initiate transactions, and ‘non-hierarchical’ insofar as every node has the full ledger. Permissionless, public and nonhierarchical also carry connotations re- garding the nature of power. Outcomes seem to be an emergent feature of activity of the network and potential power over the form and function of activity seems diffused throughout the network, rather than concentrated in the hands of a few (though there is considerable debate regarding the true extent of these features in theory and practice; see, for example, BIS, 2018; Garrod, 2019).12 Moreover, cryptocurrency operating ac- cording to these features also share an absence noted in the introduction. It is no given organisation’s responsibility to maintain the value of the ‘token’. Since a main use of such cryptocurrency has been as a speculative asset, this has been a problem, at least from the point of view of cryptocurrency as a means of payment.


9 In the case of Bitcoin, the reward derived from ‘proof of work’ halves every 210,000 blocks (approxi- mately every 4 years); the system is asymptotic with an exponential slowdown rate in Bitcoin creation to a maximum of 21 million (in 2020 this was approximately 12.5 BTC (bitcoin) per block or increase of supply of about 4% per year, though the reward system was scheduled to reduce); and about 19 million had been mined so far. Bitcoin decomposes into sub-units for transaction payments using a decimal system. 1 BTC
= 1,000 mBTC (millibitcoin), so 1 millibit = 0.001 BTC; 1 BTC = 1,000,000 μBTC (microbitcoin), so 1
μBTC = 0.000001 BTC; 1 BTC = 100,000,000 Satoshis, so 1 Satoshi = 0.00000001 BTC and 100 Satoshis
= 1 μBTC.
10 Note, one of the reasons Bitcoin is gradually becoming a smaller proportion of cryptocurrency activity is that later formats such as Ethereum have sought to overcome some of its inherent problems, notably ‘scal- ability, interoperability and sustainability (IMF, 2021, p. 42). Problems with ‘proof of work’, for example, have led to alternatives such as ‘proof of stake’ (e.g. BitMex Research, 2018).
11 The assumption is that miners have an in-built motive to protect the integrity of the system and act
as honest verifiers because of the DLT characteristics (they receive Bitcoin as reward and mining is com- petitive in an open system). Clearly, this does not prevent problems or fraud since it assumes a majority of honest participants to form consensus; the system is open to capture (a history or ‘51% attack’) and also to bifurcations where chains split and alternate protocols are applied to each new part (issues of what is termed ‘forking’ etc.).
12 There are numerous forums where the scope and development of cryptocurrency are discussed, e.g.,
Bitcoin: https://bitcointalk.org/index.php?topic=832519.0
 
For example, Bitcoin has varied greatly in value since 2010 (Bitcoin was first produced in 2009 but trading records begin later). In early 2010 it was valued at $0.007 and has ex- perienced at least four bubbles since then—peaking at around $16,000, $12,000, $61,000 and $63,000.13 Value has once again collapsed over 2022 and this has been replicated for many other cryptocurrency. Arguably this latest collapse is of more significance than pre- vious ones because many more people have bought into Bitcoin and cryptocurrency in recent years. For example, according to UK Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) research, speculative investment in cryptocurrency by new ‘retail investors’ greatly increased during the Covid-19 pandemic. There were an estimated 2.3 million cryptocurrency owners in the UK in early 2021, an increase from 1.9 million in 2020 (Karim and Tomova, 2021).14 The majority were invested in Bitcoin (66%), male, over 35 and in higher income groups, but the findings and subsequent further market research commissioned by the FCA from Opinium suggest there are increasing numbers of younger investors, highly influenced by social media sources and strategies; 15% of crypto investors have incomes of less than
£20,000 pa and 14% were borrowing and using leverage to invest – margins, contracts for difference etc. (FCA, 2021). Research from Makarov and Schoar (2021), however, suggests ownership of high value cryptocurrency remains concentrated – 10,000 investors owned 5 million of the 19 million currently available Bitcoin.
2.2	Stablecoin
Extreme variation in the value of non-stabilised cryptocurrency is an obvious barrier to adoption as a store of value and medium of exchange. If values are rising rapidly a ‘money’ is hoarded according to logics of speculative wealth assets. It is not treated as or used as a means of payment. If values fall rapidly then potential recipients are deterred from accepting the ‘money’ for future use. It lacks store of value. If value is highly volatile, varying up and down rapidly, then value cannot be relied upon for transaction purposes. As such, the intention to treat something as ‘money’ requires relatively stable value through time and an expectation that this will continue. Hence, some of the literature distinguishes non-stabilised cryptocurrencies as ‘cryptoassets’ (e.g. Bank of England, 2021). Of course, from a Keynesian ‘liquidity preference’ point of view money is an ‘asset’ among other assets (Keynes, 1936, pp. 166–172), but that is not the primary focus of the distinction intended here. One can still distinguish the purpose for which a potential money is demanded, held and disposed of or used (ibid. and Keynes, 1937, pp. 215–216). In this sense, the relevant usage of the term ‘asset’ refers to the intention to buy/invest in a cryptocurrency for the purposes of making a return on it as a financial ‘asset’ rather than to use it as a general means of payment or for, as the public would understand it, ‘money’ purposes (as a store of value, me- dium of exchange for transactions and for discharging a debt liability).15 An asset is

13 Visit: https://buybitcoinworldwide.com/ The site states: ‘Unlike fiat currencies however, there is no of- ficial Bitcoin price; only various averages based on price feeds from global exchanges (/exchanges/). Bitcoin Average (https://bitcoinaverage.com/explain) and CoinDesk (http://www.coindesk.com/price/) are two such indices reporting the average price. It’s normal for Bitcoin to trade on any single exchange at a price slightly different to the average.’
14 Later research commissioned by HM Revenues & Custom provides an even higher estimate of 6.7 mil-
lion adults in the UK (Russell-Jones, 2022).
15 So, the distinction turns on what it is used for rather than what it could be used for, though in a de- velopmental sense, the current use can become a barrier to how it could be used since this also has an evolving institutional context. For example, whether law and regulation accommodate to its existence and the ‘money’ is accepted in payment of taxes or is itself taxed as a financial asset rather than treated as a money store of value.
 
‘speculative’ in the Kaldorian sense of an intention to profit from contingent pricing trends (Kaldor, 1939). This contrasts with productive investment—the intent to hold onto the asset with a view to receiving a proportion of the return on the purpose of the invested asset itself in the long term (1939).16 The former (exploitation of pricing trends) is the relevant part of this definition for our purposes.
In any case, without the relevant ‘intertemporal’ characteristic of stability, a popula- tion lacks the requisite motives and trust to receive a ‘money’ now with the intention of future use as a ‘money’ (i.e. to fulfil money purposes). Instead the thing in question is continually treated as a speculative asset, despite use of terms like money or currency to refer to it. Clearly, use of the phrase ‘as a money’ implies an implicit meaning frame for what money ‘is’ that distinguishes it and also seems to invite a certain degree of cir- cularity. We will return to this in the final philosophical/social theory section. The key point at this juncture is that in a standard ‘money hierarchy’, the state stands behind the stability of its unit of account and this has various facets, such as a central bank price stability mandate.17 By contrast, lack of clear status within this ‘money hierarchy’ and lack of some organisation empowered and directed to maintain value, plus lack of a set of mechanisms to ensure stability are barriers to widespread adoption or ‘social diffusion’ of cryptocurrency as ‘money’. Hence the interest in stablecoin.
According to Arner et al. (2020, p. 3) ‘stablecoin can be defined as a cryptocurrency that aims to maintain a stable value relative to a specified asset or a pool or basket of assets.’ The specified asset (or basket) is typically fiat currency, the US$, the Euro etc., though it may also be gold or another cryptocurrency. The important point, how- ever, is that the organisation issuing stablecoin claim some form of commitment to maintaining an underlying stable ratio of 1:1 against the given reference asset—the fiat currency, gold etc. There are two main approaches or mechanisms used to at- tempt to maintain stability: ‘asset linked’ (or what is sometimes termed ‘full reserve’) stablecoin and ‘algorithm based’ stablecoin. The Arner et al. definition relates mainly to the former and the former is far more prevalent than the latter.
In the case of asset linked stablecoin, the organisation issuing the coin (the digital tokens) offers some statement of, or equivalent to, a ‘can be redeemed for’ commit- ment for the cryptocurrency—a ‘guarantee’. The mechanism that stands behind this is easily illustrated. In order to acquire the stablecoin a client must first deposit the relevant asset with the issuer. Again, this is typically a designated fiat currency. This is exchanged with the cryptocurrency—for example, 1US$ gets you 1 Crypto Unit (1CU). There are also fees to be paid by clients to the issuer to hold an account with them. These clients are typically (though do not have to be) intermediaries who then go on to offer the stablecoin to others, who hold it in digital wallets and pay some small

16 Kaldor’s emphasis is slightly different than Keynes. Keynes focus is on why money exists, and why there is a difference between a transactional and precautionary (store of value) demand for it, as well as a speculative use in liquidity preference (a difference between active and inactive balances). Keynes defines the speculative component of liquidity preference as ‘the object of securing profit from knowing better than the market what the future will bring forth’ (Keynes 1936, p. 170). In the General Theory he emphasises that it is the quantity of money and liquidity preference that determines the interest rate, and that the interest rate is the reward for parting with liquidity for some period. He emphasises that it is uncertainty regarding future interest rates (returns) that makes sense of use of money as a store of value (since in the absence of uncertainty one would opt to use available money to invest in other assets that generate a return) and he dis- tinguishes this from its immediate use to transact current business. There is, of course, considerable debate regarding all of this among Post-Keynesians.
17 See later philosophy section for the difference theory makes to appropriate use of language – money hierarchy, moneyness etc.
 
fee for use of the stablecoin in any given transaction, and transactions are actioned using blockchain DLTs. The original issuing organisation keeps a reserve of the asset it has guaranteed to redeem or high-quality liquid assets easily converted into it.18 Since new stablecoin are only issued in response to new deposits, this is, in principle, a ‘full’ reserve system, i.e., not fractional. For example, there is a value of US$1 of as- sets for every issued 1CU. In principle, the reserve can be used to meet any demands to redeem the CUs for the designated asset—the fiat currency (US$ etc). This stands behind the service provider’s commitment/guarantee of a 1:1 redemption ratio.
In the case of algorithm based stablecoin, an algorithm is built into the coding of electronic (‘smart’) contracts, which automatically modifies the supply of the given stablecoin in response to demand. Rather than maintaining a ‘reserve’, the stablecoin provider builds a mechanism into the technology, which is aimed to bring the value of the stablecoin back to 1:1 with a given reference currency. The basic principle is that the smart contract is coded to respond to particular events—focused on deviations in the value of the stablecoin. If the stablecoin rises above 1:1 with the referenced fiat currency then the contract event triggers an automatic increase in supply of the stablecoin—tending to lower its value; if it falls below 1:1 a ratcheting restriction in supply is triggered. The intent is to create a ‘convergence’ mechanism according to standard economic concepts of market induced effects. In principle this maintains a 1:1 conversion rate.

2.3	Some clarifications: sovereign spaces matter and stable doesn’t quite mean stable
It should be immediately obvious that stablecoin differs in its general features from non- stabilised cryptocurrency. The latter are open source, permissionless, nonhierarchical and facilitate peer to peer transactions. The whole ostensibly bypasses the existent fi- nancial system. In the case of stablecoin, however, while the ordinary transactions part of use is DLT blockchain and can be peer to peer, issuance is controlled and is thus permissioned and hierarchical (Wadsworth, 2018, p. 8). This, in turn, brings stablecoin into the orbit of existent financial organisations. This is especially so of asset linked stablecoin. A reserve system requires a custodian and management and this requires either a specialist service provider for a standalone reserve system or an account at and agreement with a relevant commercial or universal bank.
Of course, it has always been the case that claims that non-stabilised cryptocurrency are an alternative that bypasses the existent financial infrastructure have been over- stated. The technology may not depend on the existent banking infrastructure but that infrastructure pre-exists the given cryptocurrency and any state has the power to dictate how a cryptocurrency is treated in its sovereign space. Moreover, some states have the power to pressure others in the ‘international monetary and financial system’ and there are international organisations with influence. The vast majority of those ac- quiring cryptocurrency will have a bank account and the original funds to buy tokens

18 Arner et al. (2020) refer to all versions as asset-linked, but the IMF (2021, pp. 48–49) provides a further decomposition of the reserves: ‘Cash-based’ (cash, bank deposits and US government bills), asset- based (corporate bonds, commercial paper or commodities) and crypto-asset-based (a portfolio of other cryptocurrencies and this tends to be an overcollateralised system – e.g. if the stablecoin is issued in ex- change for a cryptocurrency it is in principle prudent to require more than 1:1 since cryptocurrency value is highly volatile). For an example of different reserve compositions see IMF, 2021(Chapter 2, Figure 2.3 Panel 1) at https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2021/10/12/global-financial-stability-report- october-2021#Chapter-2:-The-Crypto-Ecosystem-and-Financial-Stability-Challenges
 
and any speculative profits made buying and selling the tokens will likely have to even- tually go through an account in the banking system. The state, meanwhile, decides on the status of cryptocurrency for tax purposes, it can at the extreme prohibit its ‘mining’ within its borders and ban its use for transactions and it can influence its interaction and incorporation into the banking and investment system (its status re client money and money laundering laws, its eligibility for and position in a portfolio, its integration into and transmission in and out of savings and deposit accounts and eligibility for de- posit insurance etc.).19 Even the scope for cryptocurrency to facilitate criminal activity of various kinds relies on the creation of conducive environments somewhere—hence the link to failed states, tax and secrecy jurisdictions etc. Moreover, most forms of financial criminality rely on weak or absent laws in some places and facilitating and protective legal structures in others (not least contract and property law), hence con- cerns over the role recognised financial centres really play in networked activity via the ‘commercialisation of sovereignty’ (concerns shared by the Tax Justice Network and Global Wealth Chain researchers etc.; see Seabrooke and Wigan, 2022). A ‘smart contract’ may be an agreement but it is, strictly speaking, not a contract unless the law somewhere makes it so (for an introduction to smart contracts see Janssen, 2021). In any case, it is an error to infer the radical ‘independence’ of cryptocurrency from the observation that states’ sphere of influence over innovations in finance tends to be re- active. Cryptocurrencies create new technological challenges for a regulator but these are not insurmountable and sovereign legal spaces still matter in a ‘virtual world’.
Stablecoin invites similar comment, mainly focused on the status of a reserve system. Most of the relevant issues begin as questions, suggesting problems. For example, is the reserve really ‘full’ (are new tokens only issued in response to new deposits, have re- serve assets been replaced with debt instruments etc.), is the reserve sufficient for pur- pose, who monitors the reserve, is the system transparent and how clear are the rules? Also, where and what kind of custodian and management is involved, who guards this guard, who is responsible for oversight and implementation of actions? What protocols are there to deal with crisis events, is a ‘full’ reserve sufficient defence against extreme events such as a sudden widespread dumping of the stablecoin, what legal protections or rights do customers have and what obligations does the stablecoin provider have? Clearly these are issues of design, implementation, flaws and possible manipulation, but they are not issues in isolation, since stablecoin does not seek to bypass existent fi- nancial organisation, but rather integrates into it and depends on it. It thus comes into the purview of regulators—an issue we will return to later.20
It should perhaps also be noted here that stablecoin issuers often specifically state that their cryptocurrency is not ‘money’. This too is a by-product of the continued relevance of sovereign legal spaces. This is not to suggest something cannot become an accepted means of payment unless it acquires some formal legal status, but it does indicate legal entanglements are relevant issues. In any case, a private stablecoin is not ‘state money’, but it is pegged to the currency denomination of the money of account of some or several sovereign spaces and the seeming intention is to position it as means

19 For example, in 2017 Thomson Reuters surveyed countries’ different institutional responses to cryptocurrency—whether they had or were considering integrating it into ‘legal tender’ or were treating it as a potential form of property—a wealth asset. This illustrates the discretion states have. Visits: https://blogs. thomsonreuters.com/answerson/wp-content/uploads/sites/3/2017/10/World-of-Cryptocurrencies-graphic.  pdf For something more recent see Chainalysis (2021) and later comment.
20 But see, for example, Nabilou and Prüm (2019).
 
of payment, and in many jurisdictions it must, therefore, be registered as such (in terms of payment system regulation). Tether, first issued in 2014, is among the earliest, most prevalent and best known stablecoin.21 It is available separately as issuance with a redemption against the US$, the Euro, the Yuan and gold. The Tether site makes the common ‘full reserve’ and ‘this is not money’ claim:
Tether tokens exist as digital tokens built on bitcoin (Omni and Liquid Protocol), Ethereum, EOS, Tron, Algorand, SLP and OMG blockchains.These transport protocols consist of open source soft- ware that interface with blockchains to allow for the issuance and redemption of cryptocurrency tokens, in our case, ‘Tether tokens’… Tether Platform currencies are 100% backed by Tether’s re- serves. Tether tokens are redeemable and exchangeable pursuant to Tether Limited’s terms of ser- vice. The conversion rate is 1 Tether USD₮ token (USD₮) equals 1 USD… The Tether Platform is fully reserved when the sum of all Tether tokens in circulation is less than or equal to the value of our reserves. Through our Transparency page, anyone can view both of these numbers on a daily basis… Tether currencies are not money, but are digital tokens formatted to work on blockchains. Tether tokens hold their value at 1:1 to the underlying assets. https://tether.to/faqs/
The term money hierarchy is typically used to refer to the order of dependability and universality in any given sovereign space of things used to fulfil money purposes. Even though no formal claim may be made that they are ‘money’, stablecoin tokens are still placed in a money hierarchy. It is also noteworthy that the coin carries its own branding (₮), in addition to that of its redeemable fiat currency. This is a different situ- ation than retail/commercial bank money, which goes to great lengths to disguise that it is not state issued money—a Santander issued unit denominated in the UK£ does not draw attention to this.
It should also be clear that while there are commonalities among cryptocurrency, stablecoin are different by design. They are intended to solve the problem that there is no organisation (such as the state) standing behind the value of the token. A stabil- ising mechanism, in principle, fixes stablecoin in a money hierarchy, simulating what the issuer of state money usually does for bank money (a guarantee it will trade at par). This reduces the adverse problems previously noted re the tendency to encourage use of cryptocurrency as a speculative asset (hoarding etc.). However, as a final point, it should also be clear that having a commitment to stability is no guarantee that a mech- anism can or will achieve that outcome.
While a redemption commitment may place a floor under the value of a given asset linked stablecoin, that committed rate is not necessarily the conversion or exchange rate anywhere else. The holder of the CU does not have to redeem it back to the issuer. The reserve does not prevent volatility, since there can be many reasons why the value of any currency will tend to diverge from another based on the volume of transac- tions and relative demands on the currencies, as well as events in the world affecting confidence in the stability of a currency. However, the commitment/guarantee is a deterrent against using the stablecoin CU as a speculative asset, since it is known that there is a commitment to its stability and a provider who can intervene to stabilise the CU. According to work by Richard Lyons and Ganesh Viswanath-Natraj, for ex- ample, prior to 2018 all of Tether’s issued CUs were distributed to a primary exchange and then onto secondary markets, but in 2018 they introduced a modification (Lyons

21 For historic and current data on market capitalisation and trading volumes visit: https://stablecoinindex. com. See also see IMF, 2021, (Chapter 2, Figure 2.1 Panel 4) at https://www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/ Issues/2021/10/12/global-financial-stability-report-october-2021#Chapter-2:-The-Crypto-Ecosystem-and- Financial-Stability-Challenges
 
and Viswanath-Natraj, 2020). This emulates the convergence mechanism we described for algorithmic stablecoin and takes the form of an arbitrage incentivised system that closes pricing differentials around the 1:1 ratio.
The Tether reserve retains a proportion of issued CUs and these are made available to secondary markets. If the market price (on exchanges) of the CUs trends above the desired 1:1 ratio with its referenced fiat currency (US$ etc.), an ‘investor’ can buy CUs from the Tether Treasury at 1:1 and sell them on an exchange for profit, so there is a flow of CUs to the market (and according to standard reasoning, this increases supply and likely reduces price towards the 1:1 ratio). Conversely, if the market price of the CUs trends below 1:1, an investor can buy them in the secondary market and sell to the Tether Treasury, i.e., convert or redeem the CUs (reducing supply in the market and so raising the price towards the 1:1 ratio). Small margins of profit as Tether de- viates from 1:1, therefore, induce trading activity that encourages a tendency back to 1:1—a classic arbitrage situation.
To be clear, none of this guarantees the adequacy of the organisational and institutional components of a stablecoin (whether the reserve is really ‘full’, the status of management and oversight etc.) and nor can use of such mechanisms prevents sudden massive dumping of a stablecoin and a ‘positive feedback loop’ problem, if a provider is forced to sell mul- tiple liquid reserve assets (creating a ‘fire-sale’) to meet redemptions of fiat currency etc. Moreover, a convergence mechanism is limited by the adequacy of standard reasoning as a reasonable representation of market processes. It depends on the scale of activity among arbitragers compared to its use across all uses—since any pressures pushing the value of Tether or a similar stablecoin away from 1:1 requires sufficient arbitrage activity compared to volumes of total transactions to have some material influence.22 In any case, it indicates that the function of a stablecoin as a stable store of value that underpins confidence in its use as a means of payment can depend for its efficacy on its availability as an arbitraged asset. This in itself is revealing, since this is a subset of speculative behaviour in finan- cial markets, and consideration of this behaviour leads eventually to the broader question, when used as a means of payment what are stablecoin used to pay ‘for’?
Stablecoin are currently mainly a solution to a speculative investment problem, ra- ther than a standard alternative money in the broader ecosystem of payments, but they are not in principle restricted to this. Brief discussion of this provides a convenient transition to the issue areas set out in the introduction.

3.	The form and functioning of payments technologies
According to Matt Levine at Bloomberg: ‘I have never read a profile of someone be- coming a billionaire by using crypto to solve a problem other than trading more crypto’ (Fortson, 2022).23 Levine’s comments speak to the observation that cryptocurrency
22 A similar problem applies to algorithmic stablecoin insofar as the algorithm may have difficulty modi- fying the volumes of available currency in the face of a catastrophic ‘run’. This occurred recently to the algorithmic stablecoin Titan whose value fell to zero in June 2021.
23 Major fortunes so far have been made by those with large originating stakes in crypto exchanges. For example, Coinbase was floated in 2021 and Brian Armstrong’s stake had an estimated net worth of $9.4 billion early 2022. Similarly Changpeng Zhao at Binance crypto exchange has an estimated worth of $96 bil- lion (Fortson 2022). https://www.bloomberg.com/news/features/2022-01-09/binance-ceo-cz-s-net-worth- billionaire-holds-world-s-biggest-crypto-fortune This seems to follow a well-worn track for finance alluded to in the comic title of Fred Schwed’s Where are the Customers’Yachts? in 1940. However, see later comment on collapse of exchanges in 2022. The collapse of stock valuations in 2022 has, of course affected these for- tunes; Coinbase stock was valued at $387 per share in November 2021 and had lost 80% of this as of end of May 2022.
 
trading fuels asset bubbles of the kind chronicled in Manias, Panics and Crashes, be- ginning with the Dutch Tulip bubble of 1636 (Kindleberger and Aliber, 2005, p. 8). As mentioned several times now and as multiple sources suggest, stablecoin are cur- rently mainly used for ease of entry into and rapid exit from speculative investments in cryptocurrency exchanges (FSB, 2022, p. 9, p. 11; Arner et al., 2020; IMF, 2021).They are, however, also used in some emerging economies for the purposes of remittance, avoidance of capital controls and in processes of flight to safety and ‘dollarisation’ in the context of currency devaluations (Chainalysis, 2021).
Focusing for the moment on the speculative use, transfer in and out of speculative asset trading on a cryptocurrency exchange to a fiat currency and into a bank account can involve delay due to issues such as compliance with anti-money laundering (AML) and combatting the financing of terrorism (CFT) regulation. Since speculative trading can involve marginal losses and gains that are highly time sensitive, a stablecoin (with its redemption commitment) offers two potential services here, or rather the same one with slightly different connotations: it can act as a ‘safe haven’ when quickly closing out speculative investment in a non-stabilised cryptocurrency (a ‘flight to safety’) or it can act as a staging point and harbour for ‘hit and run’ manipulative activity when engaged in dubious ‘pump and dump’ strategies (see Griffin and Shams, 2020; Hamrick et al., 2019 and the previous Lyons and Viswanath-Natraj, 2020, which takes issue with some aspects of Griffin and Shams).24
Clearly, portfolio reallocation between non-stabilised cryptocurrency is also an op- tion, but can be less attractive. This is one reason why cryptocurrency exchanges are keen to either develop their own stablecoin or develop relations with primary issuers. So while it is true that the main forms of stablecoin have (at time of writing) maintained relative stability against reference fiat currency, this is not indicative of any absolute separation from the speculative ferment that has gripped non-stabilised cryptocurrency and nor does it mean they can or will avoid collapse.25 The recent Global Financial Stability Report brings all this together (IMF, 2021, p. 42). The cryptocurrency chapter highlights that a main use of stablecoin is to settle spot and derivatives trading on ex- changes and that this often involves leverage, which adds a further complication once stablecoin are active in the wider financial ecosystem (since leveraged failures may affect valuation in ways that the original commitment that new stablecoin will only be issued matched to a new deposit are not designed to cope with).
However, it is important to distinguish current uses of stablecoin from its potential
to integrate into existing popular payment platforms for goods and services, as well as the potential applications that stablecoin as a digital money may facilitate. Both take stablecoin beyond cryptocurrency as an end in itself and both are reasons why the no- tion of ‘systemic’ stablecoin has gained some traction. Much of the initial concern was induced by Facebook’s proposal for Libra, its own stablecoin digital money in 2019 (Eichengreen and Viswanath-Natraj, 2020). Following expression of concern from nu- merous sources, Libra was rethought and a ‘white paper’ issued in April 2020. Libra was later renamed ‘Diem’ in December 2020 (Diem, 2020). The Diem Association


24 Visit: https://www.ftc.gov/news-events/press-releases/2021/05/ftc-data-shows-huge-spike-cryptocurrency- investment-scams For additional issues see also Economist (2019) and later discussion.
25 For example, the price of the main stablecoin against the US$ have remained around 1:1 from
September 2018 to December 2020, but have begun to deviate more significantly since January 2021, albeit the trend increase is small. For historic data visit: https://stablecoinindex.com
 
was created to oversee the project and this was formally separated from Facebook and included participation from numerous other organisations – Mastercard, Visa, Uber, Vodafone etc.26 In October 2021, Facebook announced it was rebranding as ‘Meta’.
Facebook/Meta has a customer base of billions, global reach, an existent business infrastructure, huge financial resources, a ready set of banking and financing relations and a series of online payments systems into which a stablecoin could quickly be inte- grated, enabling it to rapidly upscale and become widespread. The scope for this has, as we set out in the introduction, invited various considerations according to different issue-areas. However, while the issue-areas remain worthy of consideration, Meta has subsequently abandoned Diem (Knowles, 2022). Reports suggest this was because overcoming regulatory concerns in key countries was proving currently too difficult and because they may be able to achieve similar ends in other ways. The decision underscores our previous point, sovereign legal spaces (as well as relevant international organisations) still matter in a ‘virtual world’.27
In any case, the most prominent long term stablecoin issue-area revolves around concerns regarding substitution of one form of payment for another. The notion of ‘substitution’, however, does not quite capture what may occur, since the relevant payment infrastructure and technologies enable not just a change in how something is paid for but also what can be paid for. These are not specific to stablecoin, but sta- bility makes other aspects of digital money more attractive to possible users, while a private stablecoin has obvious attractions to the issuer and platform provider, since it embeds a power relation (something we will return to at various points). In any case, a stablecoin built into or for existent businesses facilitates transition from speculative asset to everyday form of payment.
There are several high-profile potentials that new forms of digital money might offer and we begin with those.

3.1	Divisibility and micropayments
As with any other cryptocurrency, stablecoin can also be fractional. This, somewhat awkwardly, does not refer to a fractional reserve system in the standard banking sense but the digital potential for a decimal system to be denominated in infinitely divisible units. The relevant meaning refers to payment that is not restricted to the stated de- nominations of a standard unit of value e.g., smallest unit as 1 pence or 1 cent, but can be ‘fractions’ i.e., smaller amounts. Micropayment can be a major attraction for situations where there is some form of repeated activity to which some small fee can be applied and where an automated digital payments system means collection may be all but costless to the recipient who charges the fee. There are numerous existent situations where such ‘micropayments’ might apply. For example, as an alternative to advertising-supported models or subscription for digital media services (channel streaming etc.). There are also applications that have been mainstays of science fiction for years, but are now common considerations in terms of the potentials of ‘decentral- ised finance’ (DeFi), fintech and its infrastructure and the broader context of changes

26 Various other subsidiaries dealt with functions—such as Calibra (later Novi), which was going to be the name of the digital wallet holding libra currency.
27 Reports suggest Meta is selling out to Silvergate Capital, a small Californian bank that had been
working on the original project for the Diem Association. Silvergate has numerous relations with blockchain companies and will likely have no difficulty finding some current use for the project.
 
it is supposed these might integrate into (e.g. Bernards and Campbell-Verduyn (2019) and the special issue which it introduces).28
While there may be debate regarding whether the combination of relevant technolo- gies (AI, machine learning, robotics etc.) constitute a ‘fourth industrial revolution’ and whether it will have the characteristics claimed by the consultancies and special inter- ests who have pushed the term, the relevant technologies are either in embryonic form or are being actively developed (Morgan, 2019; Brown and Whittle, 2020; Moll, 2021). For example, application to consumer durables etc. in a smart home, especially when the relevant technologies have ‘Internet of Things’ (IoT) characteristics and combine an AI home management function with provision of numerous connected services. The potential here matches a fractional money to charging systems that follow the same unit payment logic as paying for electricity already does in many places, but now applied more generally to management functions and their applications for shopping, leisure, health, financial and environmental budgeting etc. in a total system. IP owner- ship, rental agreements and continual micropayments fit easily into this situation. It is not inconceivable, moreover (and there are already demonstration exhibitions at trade shows from corporations), that smart homes licensed from some major provider will become the preferred solution to the aging-demographic problem and crisis in social care (especially dementia) that many advanced capitalist economies are beginning to signal (Morgan, 2021a).
There are numerous other areas of application in gaming and leisure and it seems likely that if the concept of a ‘Metaverse’ gains traction it too will likely involve micro- payments, as might transport solutions. One can readily imagine new forms of dy- namic toll systems for future traffic—a practice of bids and payments for position within traffic and relative speed throughout any given journey—and this is something that will appeal to both corporations and governments once tax receipts from fossil fuels are eliminated.
Some of these possibilities may seem currently exotic or unlikely but one should not dismiss the tendency for technology to make available what convenience or lack of real choice makes us accept prior to realising the full implications of what we have signed up for. Micropayment is simply an extension of the observable tendency to commodify and charge for any possible aspect of society according to underlying claims that mar- kets solve problems (and which a financialisation theorist might describe as a further financialisation of everyday life and a political economist a further development of a human being as fictive capital). An exotic future can quickly become a mundane present, especially since service issuers have scope for what might be termed ‘exploit- ation economies’ (mass application of micropayments are cumulatively lucrative) and service users might be pacified by provision of a simplified interface that asks only for your budget and preferences as parameters for delegated decision-making (a design that would surely appeal to service issuers, rendering the reality of what is also going on as invisible to the user as colocation-exploiting high frequency trading is to a retail investor in shares).
To be clear, the existence of such potential does not mean private stablecoin pay- ment systems will proliferate because of that potential, the initial focus is likely to be ordinary online payments for goods and services. But the example of automated trans- port does point us towards another interesting potential.

28 For a clear decomposition of DeFi see (FSB, 2022, p. 16).
 
3.2	Programmable money
The efficacy and appeal of micropayments presupposes they embed into some con- ducive social context which combines a payments system and budgeting in a broader infrastructure. This speaks to another aspect of digital money potential, programmable money. Here, the use to which digital money could be put is built into the money. This is a subset of the potential inherent to a ‘smart contract’, a term we used briefly earlier. This is a digital contract that is activated according to given conditions or is triggered by given events. Programming also extends to rendering money time limited. If not spent in a given period, it ‘expires’.
So, how money is directed into a stablecoin wallet, what it can be used for and how long it lasts could all be programmed. Clearly, insofar as this builds control into money it raises issues. Much of this then hinges on purpose and possible contexts range from the frivolous to varieties of discipline which may be more or less benevolent or ma- lign. A swear jar wallet for a family marked as ‘holiday funds’ is quite different than a gambler’s ‘poker wallet’ and the latter is quite different depending on who has control over the budget, preferences and programme purpose—government, a regulator, a designated friend of an addict, a gambling firm etc. Similarly, government use of pro- grammable money can carry quite different implications, from asserted imperatives, such as a programmable money that is integrated into a carbon budget, to the pater- nalistic, such as welfare wallets that can only be spent on a range of approved healthy and/or ecologically and climatologically responsible foods, and to the more sinister, such as wallets that are the only accepted payment system for vital services but which are ‘socially scored’, adding or removing credits according to approvals and behaviour (and perhaps also designating priority access).
As with micropayment, programmable money has been fertile ground for science fiction, but now stands on the cusp of the possible and as potential near future fact. Similar to micropayment, which facilitates ‘exploitation economies’, much of the ap- peal rests at least initially with its attraction to those who control issuance and its pur- pose—and how it is perceived would be likely as important as what it actually achieves, since there is significant difference between the negative connotations of an oppressive discriminatory ‘caste money’ and an empowering if disciplining, ‘utilitarian purposed money’. In the UK, for example, given the situation in 2022, ‘energy wallet money’ might go a long way towards integrating programmable money into society…
In any case, programable money adds a new inflection to the aphorism ‘money is power’29 as well as the statement ‘my money is as good as anyone else’s’, since any social or economic distinction can become a constituent of the money itself. This is a curious reversal of the general tendency to seek to universalise money as an all-purpose anonymous and transferable medium of exchange—intended to be as liquid as possible. That said, however, the basic practices are, as any birthday celebrant, survivor of war or recent asylum seeker can attest, assimilations and extensions of gift cards, voucher and coupon use, employee credits at the company store and/or rationing systems.


29 Given early academic expression by Max Weber: ‘Money is not a “mere voucher for unspecified util- ities”, which could be altered at will without any fundamental effect on the character of the price system as a struggle of man against man. “Money” is, rather, primarily a weapon in this struggle, and prices are expres- sions of the struggle; they are instruments of calculation only as estimated quantifications of relative chances in this struggle of interests.’ (Weber, 1978 [1922], p. 108)
 
3.3	Automated payments and financial instruments
We stated earlier that we wanted to emphasise that the relevant payment infrastructure and technologies enable not just a change in how something is paid for but also what can be paid for. This should now be clear. There is, however, at least one more appli- cation worth noting here that provides an extension of programmable money, ‘auto- mated financial payments’ (Arner et al., 2020). There are numerous situations where payment for something rests on a subsequent set of events and agreed conditions sub- ject to some form of contract. Buying a house is the classic example. These kinds of situations often involve some degree of uncertainty and distrust based on one side or the other reneging etc. There is, therefore, some attraction in replacing human inter- action via professional intermediaries with a smart contract into which an automatic triggering payment from a source such as stablecoin can be embedded. The contract combines automatic transfer of ownership (or some other completion characteristic) and ‘atomic payment’ (simultaneous payment at point of transfer). Moreover, atomic payment has numerous other possible applications—automatic payment of VAT to tax authorities at the point of sale of goods etc.
In terms of further extensions, it requires no great perspicacity to appreciate that there is great scope for such payment within derivatives, given that these are essen- tially quantified contracts with exchange conditions—and stablecoin are already a common feature of futures contracts for investment on cryptocurrency exchanges (FSB, 2022). It is similarly no great insight to realise that as payment systems and technologies change then provision of ‘money’ and payments infrastructure may also change and this ultimately involves issues of where power resides and who exercises it.

4.	The scope for widespread adoption of stablecoin to empower existing actors and introduce new actors able to influence where power resides and who exercises it
There are at least three potentials worth considering here: the scope for major multi- national corporations to issue and then disseminate a stablecoin through their plat- forms; the scope for this to facilitate further usage in cross-border payments and domestic emerging markets; and the scope for investment banking etc. to benefit from legitimation effects that facilitate expansion of their business. Each is ultimately an issue of where power resides and who exercises it.

4.1	Corporations and the payments system
The first and major concern here is that issuance of a private stablecoin extends the type and control over payments systems by a large corporation or coalition of such corporations. As previously noted, concern with this potential was mainly induced by Facebook/Meta’s project but persists since another project could eventually emerge along similar lines, so there are issues of new provision and possibly new providers. Across this range the main concern is that a stablecoin could be the default or pre- ferred payment system that is embedded into the range of services offered and prod- ucts provided by major corporations who dominate markets. The obvious focus for this is integration into online platform payments, but there is no reason why this need be so, since digital money need not imply an absence of physical presence. For example,
 
Amazon’s new ‘just walk out’ stores could readily accommodate a stablecoin payment system using some form of Amazon CU.
Consider what this ‘just walk out’ payment system indicates. It is a variation on the automated payments potential stated in the previous section. Moreover, it is a vari- ation which draws attention to a trend change in how payment occurs and thus how money is commonly recognised and used. It dispenses with various well-established (though declining) practices of itemising, counting and calculating, which invite us to focus on and reflect on the link between purchase and payment. A till system in a physical store and a checkout system online retain elements of this—and the former also reinforces status and approval-disapproval effects in a public environment that requires queuing, since this invites an active imagination to consider what is con- veyed to others regarding purchase decisions. ‘Just walk out’ by contrast renders payment ‘thoughtless’ and this alters the socialisation that surrounds consumption. Clearly, this potential suppression of material and transactional consciousness in the agency of consumption sits awkwardly with long term climate and ecological goals (even in the woefully inadequate sense of the ‘green consumer’), as well as with more immediate concerns in places like the UK, given the current deep anxiety induced by the rising ‘cost of living’. One can only wonder how this might continue to evolve as biometrics become more sophisticated. Bodies are already in some instances pay- ment portals, but there is further scope for shifts from other physical representations of money and from multi-device payment (watches, smartphones, debit and credit cards etc.) to simply situations where the body and its augmentations becomes a money portal or wallet location.
In any case, concern regarding widespread adoption of a stablecoin cannot be ad- equately articulated unless one properly contextualises the role such stablecoin might play for the corporations who develop or adopt them. Issuing a stablecoin represents a business opportunity to large corporations. It is not merely of interest in itself. It intro- duces an additional element controlled by the corporation—issuing a money—but it is via the broader ‘business models’ of corporations that stablecoin acquires significance. If potential customers can be persuaded to adopt a stablecoin then they are also being encouraged to have available a wallet of corporate money. The stablecoin may be li- quid and in principle readily transferable (or in the jargon, ‘interoperable’), but this is different than whether the stablecoin creates a ‘customer base in waiting’. Moreover, if we consider this in online terms, it seems likely that a corporation would apply nu- merous subtle (and less subtle) ways to channel payments to their platforms deterring transfer and thus undermining interoperability in practice (Morgan, 2022a). Platform businesses already allocate considerable resources to designing systems that manipu- late the psychology of users and it is naïve to think that they wouldn’t apply the same principles to stablecoin as an integral aspect of payment platforms. The system may not become entirely (in the jargon) ‘closed loop’, but a corporation’s destinations may still be ‘first port of call’. In general, there are numerous strategies an issuer might use to promote the stablecoin’s use: treating it as the default or preferred payment option, offering loyalty discounts for payment using it, providing ‘cashback’, offering credit in a stablecoin form and perhaps even paying a small sum of interest on stablecoin wallets held with the platform. These, of course, would all affect the nature of a ‘full reserve’. Overall, within a business model, corporations have great scope to pursue strategies all of which are ultimately ways to ‘tie’ customers to platforms. This tie is simply an- other way of saying that a private stablecoin becomes ‘systemic’ and it highlights how
 
a stablecoin could readily become yet one more way to engage in monopoly behaviour. Systemic, however, has further possibilities and this brings us to the second potential.

4.2	Cross-border payments and alternative domestic currency
It is also possible that the creation and promotion of a stablecoin by one or a group of major multinationals who operate in various countries leads to its adoption for cross-border payments and as an alternative currency in some sovereign spaces. If a corporate sponsored stablecoin familiar from payment platforms becomes widely accepted, it becomes widely recognised and familiar and is thus more likely to be adopted for international payment purposes. This is especially so if the exchange rate of domestic currency against major currencies like the US$ is highly volatile, since stablecoin is issued in a stable relation to primary currencies like the US$. A private stablecoin could thus become standard for global transactions. In similar fashion, such a stablecoin could become a preferred means of payment in some ‘emerging markets’ since it is stable against primary currencies and thus may contrast sharply with a do- mestic currency prone to devaluation or hyperinflation and which has acquired the status of ‘failed money’. Stablecoin could thus become another option along the lines of the well-known phenomenon of ‘Dollarization’ (the legal tender sovereign money of account is in practice no longer the preferred currency).
To be clear, however, stablecoin is no more a necessary condition for such activity than it is a condition of the possibilities of the technologies of digital money. Stability and the backing of large corporations merely facilitates adoption and thus prolifer- ation or diffusion of the ‘money’. As we noted earlier, in addition to speculative uses, if one looks to recent research and evidence, one of the major reasons for the growth of cryptocurrency already, despite the existence of numerous forms of cryptocurrency and the various impediments and uncertainties that exist, is to make cross-border payments and because of domestic currency problems. As the recent Global Financial Stability Report (IMF, 2021, p. 44, p. 51) notes, uptake of stablecoin has contributed to ‘cryptoization’ in many countries i.e., the adoption and use of cryptocurrencies ra- ther than (so far at least) a single cryptocurrency. The Report draws on research by the data analysis firm, Chainalysis. According to Chainalysis, trading of cryptocurrency for speculative portfolio purposes is dominated by countries with longstanding deep liquid financial markets (the US etc.), but the major areas of growth are in Asia and Latin America, and major reasons for adoption in countries like Venezuela and Argentina are because of either domestic inflation or currency devaluation, and concomitantly, to fa- cilitate remittances into the country or avoid capital controls when transferring money out (Chainalysis, 2021, p. 21, pp. 40–42).30
So, there is already growing use of cryptocurrency for cross-border payments and as
an alternative domestic money of account despite the many varieties of cryptocurrency

30 Another notable example is the decision in September 2021 by El Salvador to adopt Bitcoin as legal tender based on the argument that 70% of the population were unbanked and this would facilitate remit- tances (FSB, 2022, p. 9). El Salvador is unusual in that it lacks it owns currency and uses the US$ (see later notes). At the end of 2021 it was reported that Tether transactions spiked and this was activity to escape the collapse of the Turkish Lira. Similarly, the analysts Kaiko reported another spike in the first week of March 2022 in response to the collapse of the Russian Rouble induced by sanctions because of the invasion of Ukraine. https://blog.kaiko.com/tether-volatility-spikes-to-yearly-highs-46e47c4a3db9 It is doubtful though that cryptocurrency offers sufficient scale or scope for evasion to overcome widespread restrictions on the Russian economy.
 
(cryptoassets). Clearly, widespread adoption of a single stablecoin dominated by major multinational corporations for payment system purposes, may facilitate a more uniform approach to adoption, but need not prevent the continued proliferation of cryptocurrency as cryptoassets. As the IMF also notes, ‘weak central bank credibility and a vulnerable banking system’ in some places are driving a turn to alternative cur- rency for payments but also ‘asset substitution’ (IMF, 2021, p. 51). Here there seems to be another potential, insofar as widespread adoption of a stablecoin may have in- direct effects on the continued development of cryptoassets.

4.3	Legitimation effects and digital gold as store of value
Readers who follow the business press will be aware that money managers, investment bankers and consultancies have been talking up the gains to be made from cryptocurrency and while this is mainly not about stablecoin it too has financial ‘ecosystem’ links and warrants some comment. For example, in January 2022 Goldman Sachs published a widely publicised investors note whose highlight was that cryptocurrency accounts for about 20% of the global ‘store of value’ market and if this grows then Bitcoin may achieve a value of $100,000 in the next five years (Duke, 2022). Goldman’s argument requires some clarification. Whatever the merits of their projections of future trends in asset prices (and these are highly arguable in terms of the volatility of cryptocurrency, which the analysts all acknowledge; and at time of writing looks spectacularly out of sync with events – a major collapse in all cryptocurrency markets in 2022),31 the claims made are part of a broader attempt to legitimate cryptocurrency as an ‘asset class’, since this provides scope for Goldman (as it does for others doing the same) to offer financial services that include trading of cryptocurrency. In various previous fora, Goldman had invited prominent financial experts and economists to discuss the scope for cryptocurrency to become an asset class and some of these and their own analysts have suggested cryptocurrency increasingly offers a digital alternative to gold and it is mainly in this sense they refer to it as a store of value (e.g. see the various contributions to Goldman Sachs, 2021).
Recall that we suggested early on that stablecoin is a solution to the problem that cryptocurrency lacks key features of store of value.The context and meaning illustrated by Goldman is slightly different since there is an obvious tension between the notion of stable value required for intertemporal dynamics of money as a money for payment purposes and persuading potential investors to have confidence in portfolio alloca- tion and in a facility for ‘flight to safety’ inherent to a ‘digital gold’, given this is being sold on the basis of analytics that claim a general tendency for value to appreciate. The relevant focus being pushed by Goldman and others is relative investment yield—a li- quidity preference issue of the kind we referred to earlier regarding speculative assets. This focus on dependable returns, however, seems intended to change government and public opinion regarding cryptocurrency, and this, of course, has numerous potential benefits for professional investment managers in terms of future scope to offer services (and charge fees). Clearly, if a multinational corporation stablecoin proliferates then this is another step in achieving general legitimacy for cryptocurrency from firms like


31 This seems to speak to Dave Elder-Vass’s argument that value is a product of the practices of interested parties who adopt a range of strategies to create that value—and one of his key examples is nonstabilised cryptocurrency (Elder-Vass, 2022, pp. 139–159).
 
Goldman’s point of view, so this and those firms’ interest in promoting cryptocurrency as an asset class for investment purposes are not unrelated.

4.4	Where power resides and who exercises it
We have already suggested that insofar as stablecoin transcends use as a speculative asset, it helps insert cryptocurrency into the money hierarchy. However, we might add here that insofar as a stablecoin becomes ‘systemic’ it has further possible consequences depending on how the overall ecosystem of cryptocurrency evolves. For example, the combination of promotion by large multinational corporations and its further dissem- ination for cross-border payments and domestic use (along Dollarization lines) creates scope for it to become a key new constituent in the international ‘currency hierarchy’.32 Currency hierarchy is a major area of interest and argument for Post-Keynesians and Neo-Chartalist variants such as Modern Monetary Theory, since the existence of a hier- archy is important in terms of degree of sovereignty of currency issuers and their rela- tive ‘policy space’. Any alteration to the hierarchy is important. While the potential for a global private digital money operating in terms of the currency hierarchy—currently dominated by the international role of the US$—may be novel in some ways, it is clearly not an isolate. A globally used stablecoin would involve massive use of dominant curren- cies (for full reserve purposes) and would have numerous consequences for money man- ager capitalism (from, as the last subsection indicates, trading to legitimacy effects). For Post-Keynesians, the range of actors involved in money manager capitalism and their scope for action is intimately related to currency issuer sovereignty and policy space.
In any case, we have highlighted the scope for major multinational corporations to issue and then disseminate a stablecoin through their platforms, the scope for this to facilitate further usage in cross-border payments and domestic emerging market econ- omies, and the scope for investment banking etc. to benefit from legitimation effects that facilitate expansion of their business. There is a great deal more that could be said about all three of these, but it should be fairly clear that all three of these potentials are ultimately issues of where power resides and who exercises it. In mainstream eco- nomics issues of influence are rarely discussed using the concept of power, instead they are typically framed in terms of events—shocks to the ideal functioning of a system and this is filtered through concepts such as ‘capture’, market or government ‘failure’, be- havioural irrationalities, distortions of axiomatic versions of interests, disequilibrium, deviations in the form of ‘irrational exuberance’, ‘sub-optimality’ and so on. Heterodox economists, by contrast, tend to be more interested in structures and in institutional influence on who gets to do what (surplus and distributional consequences in wage-led economies etc.). There is, from this heterodox point of view, greater complexity to both how conditions and possibilities are produced and their consequences, and greater interest in the role of norms and their justification.
One might also add that Stephen Lukes, Michel Foucault and numerous others have far more interesting things to say regarding power than most economists, though as Nuno Martins recently argued, Tony Lawson’s work combines both the sense of social constitution—power in the sense of requirement, capacity or capability to do

32 Note, there is also interest in this using variants of mainstream modeling. For example, work sug- gesting a ‘crypto-enforced monetary policy synchronisation’ may occur—relatively open economies experi- ence interest rate pressure to ZLB due to crypto leading to dollarization (an ‘impossible trinity’ problem). See Benigno et al. (2019).
 
something—and the more socio-politically oriented sense of ‘power over’ others and social resources and outcomes via organisation (Martins, 2021). We will be returning to Lawson later.
At this stage, however, we would simply note that questions of power are always relevant. One can, of course, simply highlight the potential benefits of a stabilised cryptocurrency digital money. It can be multi-purpose, programmable, convenient, borderless, fast and inter alia, conducive to micropayment, automation of payment and atomic payment. From this point of view, it seems to be a money that may evolve along with other technologies that are already embryonic and with which it seems to have some compatibilities. However, none of this renders redundant the basic questions: who benefits and how are they seeking to shape the future through development of a money and payments systems? Moreover, issues of where power resides and who exer- cises it and its consequences are ultimately ways of interrogating change and we now turn to this in terms of the potential disruptions that may occur.

5.	Stablecoin and sources of disruption and instability
If we take the points made so far as a cumulative set of potentials, then the underlying significance of systemic stablecoin involves concerns induced by the rapid adoption of an alternative money and changes to payments systems. This is change and change creates scope for disruption. We begin, with the most pervasive feature of any money system – trust, since discussion of this facilitates discussion of the major focus of con- cern regarding disruption – the widespread migration of money to stablecoin wallets.

5.1	Trust
Trust is a fundamental characteristic of a money and central banks make much of this in their publications. Central banks now increasingly acknowledge the majority of money in the economy is retail/commercial ‘bank money’. For example, Santander units denominated in the domestic unit of account, which in the UK is Sterling. This is created by banks when they extend a loan and generate a matching deposit a customer can draw on (hence M4 is the main measure of money). Particularly in a fiat money system, this creates a problem of trust—a sense that money is ephemeral (Braun, 2016). It is important, therefore, to convey to both the public and the ecosystem of financial institutions that the system that stands behind the value and availability of money is dependable to prevent fear effects such as customer runs on banks or credit freezes in inter-bank markets. The Bank of England, for example, emphasises that the central bank stands behind the value of money through its price stability mandate and behind the security of bank deposits through deposit insurance and behind the con- tinuity of the payments system through its oversight of banking, the Bank’s and the Financial Conduct Authority’s (FCA) commitment to standards and compliance and the Bank’s commitment to bank liquidity. Moreover, within the hierarchy of money, the Bank of England, emphasises that the requirement of banks to settle payments using their reserve accounts (‘riskless’ narrow or high-powered money at the central bank) and the fact deposits at retail/commercial banks are freely convertible to cash (i.e., central bank state money) at par, serves to ‘anchor’ or ‘tether’ the money system.
The introduction by corporations of a stablecoin tied to their payment platforms is another step in the ‘demise of cash’. As such, it may hasten the disappearance of
 
a component of the money system whose visibility has been a key constituent in maintaining trust. Moreover, provision of cash to the banking system is not costless (the ATM payment infrastructure has to be maintained etc.), so an alternative digital money that reduces cash use provides another reason why the system ‘as is’ may be- come unworkable.33 Still, as the money hierarchy indicates and the existence of bank money establishes, ‘private money’ is not new, the important point, however, is that stablecoin is not yet settled in its relations and consequences (Segal-Knowles, 2021). Fundamentally, a systemic stablecoin invokes the questions, how trustworthy are stablecoin issuers (what qualitative effects do they have on ‘money’?), and what ef- fects might stablecoin have on the stability of the payments system? This brings us to possible effects on the financing and business model of banks that may occur because of widespread adoption of a stablecoin, since stablecoin is an alternative to payment using bank money and since stablecoin is held in digital wallets, which is an alternative to storing money in retail/commercial bank deposit accounts.

5.2	The financing and business model of banks
Stablecoin is a ‘reserve drain’ problem. Bank money is created by the lending activity of retail/commercial banks, but banks ultimately settle transactions between customer accounts using their reserve accounts at the central bank (‘risk free’ high-powered money). A transaction between customer accounts at different banks results in a transfer of reserves and if the sum of transactions from one bank to another is greater than the reverse there is a net change. Banks have a continual need for reserves and the larger the bank’s balance sheet the greater its need. To meet that need for reserves a bank can attract deposits from other banks, borrow from the central bank or from other banks.34 This is not costless, since all likely involve interest rate charges. So, while strictly speaking reserves do not fund lending, if by that we mean reserves were

33 This may reduce scope for ‘seignorage’ i.e., the return the state/central bank earns from its monopoly on the money of account; retail/commercial banks pay face value for notes and coins but printing and minting cost far less. Also when retail/commercial banks require cash for customers they may pay for this by borrowing from the central bank (paying interest) in the reserve system or paying in assets that the central bank earns a return on. https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/knowledgebank/who-pays-for-the-bank-of-england It should also be noted that in the UK, about 8 million people depend on cash, 1.3 million people are unbanked, 6 of every 10 transactions used cash in 2008 but only 3 out of 10 in 2018 and the cash infrastructure (ATM and cash sorting centres etc.) costs around £5 billion per year (Ceeney, 2019, pp. 12–13, p. 64).
34 There is a great deal of variation and complexity to the options. The Bank of England provides a simple explanation of its services in its Market Operations Guide, which, among other things, details eligibility for and types of collateral required to borrow reserves as part of the Sterling Monetary Framework (which extends beyond banks): https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/bank-of-england-market-operations- guide/our-tools For example, the Bank’s Indexed Long-Term Repo (ILTR) allows participants to borrow central bank reserves for six months against eligible collateral.Bank to bank lending, meanwhile, is one component of money markets, lending can be very short term or longer term, uncollateralised or collat- eralised and can involve various instruments (repos, certificates of deposits etc.). In terms of simple short term uncollateralised lending of reserves between banks, perhaps the best-known system is the US ‘Federal Funds’ (whose participants also include primary dealers), which the Fed seeks to influence through its targeting of a ‘Fed Funds Rate’. Overall, though a bank is different than other types of firm, it must still re- port a set of accounts, its balance sheet will aim to maintain a positive net worth and the firm aims to make a profit. A retail/commercial bank’s deposits are recorded as liabilities on its balance sheet and its central bank reserves, loan book, and any securities or other financial assets it has are recorded as assets. Its loan book is obviously central. The bank must follow accounting rules and be ‘solvent’ according to some measure, conform to convention (to meet expectations and create trust) and comply with regulation, albeit these can be different in different jurisdictions. So in addition to reserve management, a bank must comply with do- mestic regulation’s adoption of standards and mechanisms set out by BIS and the BCBS (i.e., Basel Rules with its 3 Pillars).
 
required for lending to occur and reserves are the origin of bank money, reserves are still necessary and important and the bank is continually funding its balance sheet based on its liquidity needs.35 Hence, the Bank of England now explains (retail/com- mercial) bank money creation by suggesting banks seek reserves after lending and the Bank stands ready to offer those reserves (McLeay et al., 2014.).36
The important point, however, is that if a stablecoin is widely adopted and becomes systemic, then substitution of the stablecoin for fiat currency will result in a migration of money from bank deposits to digital wallets. Deposits are not being retained at banks. Hence, a reserve drain. This ‘disintermediation’ leads to a balance sheet contraction and this is potentially for the banking system as a whole rather than the individual bank.37 However, given that the public still have a need to borrow and banks will continue to lend, banks may resist this contraction and bank’s funding may become more reliant on other sources than deposits, which may affect both the costs to the bank of offering lending and their willingness to lend. In its recent New Forms of Digital Money, the Bank of England (2021, p. 9, pp. 34–36) argues that the consequences of this are highly un- certain, but despite this they provide an ‘illustrative scenario’ in which 20% of deposits migrate to stablecoin and there is around a 20 basis point increase in funding costs.
The Bank also makes clear that the deposits do not disappear from the system, since they will likely be redeposited in some form—so the reserve drain problem and dis- intermediation are contingent. For example, since a full reserve stablecoin issuer is re- quired to hold equivalent assets to cover issuance, they will likely buy liquid assets like government securities, most likely from nonbanks (since banks will have greater need of theirs) and these payments will then be redeposited in retail bank accounts by these non-banks. If this occurs then the main change will be that many small deposits leave the banking system, but are recycled as fewer large ‘wholesale deposits’. ‘Wholesale deposits’ are a different source of risk on the bank’s balance sheet than many small deposits, since one withdrawal of a wholesale deposit represents a larger part of the balance sheet and any issues with that deposit represent a greater single problem. This too has costs. Banks are subject to a Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) which is a test of resilience to short term acute liquidity stress and this requires banks to buy/ hold sufficient high quality liquid assets (HQLA) – government bonds or central bank reserves—to cover a 30-day stress period (allowing them to meet demands over that period using the HQLA). In the UK the LCR requires banks to hold HQLA covering 10% of household deposits over the £85,000 of deposit insurance, but 100% of on de- mand wholesale deposits. Hence a shift to wholesale deposits increases costs in order to comply with regulatory requirements (Bank of England, 2021, p. 41).
The previous are potential disruptions and issues for the banks, but these are also entangled with issues arising from activity of the stablecoin issuer. As the example

35 And, of course, the bank does not just need reserves it needs to be able to honour payments in physical cash and this too requires the bank to have the means to secure cash for settlement.
36 As the Bank also highlights, reserves do not leave the reserve system and there is no set level com-
mensurate to lending levels and regulatory reserve requirements have varied historically—so the ‘money multiplier’ is incorrect and theory of ‘intermediation of loanable funds’ is misleading. For a recent paper by Fed staff on the subject of links and mechanisms (which repudiates the money multiplier but differs from Modern Monetary Theory) see Ihrig et al. (2022).
37 For example, if a bank customer makes a payment of £100 from her deposit account this is matched
by a £100 payment in central bank reserves. The deposit is a liability and the reserve an asset and the bank loses both—hence balance sheet contraction. Whether the effect here is systemic depends then on where the reserve has been paid to and how deposits are affected—see further comment.
 
illustrates, stablecoin issuers will be required to do something with the fiat currency they are given in exchange for their issuance of their tokens. What happens then de- pends on whether they are required to employ or simply opt for a designated specialist custodian to manage the reserve or employ a qualified bank for the purpose. It also matters what form they hold reserves in—the type of asset the fiat currency is con- verted into (sovereign or corporate securities, commercial paper etc.). This returns us to questions posed in the clarification section on sovereign spaces, is the reserve really ‘full’, what is it ‘full’ of, who monitors the reserve and so on. It should also be evident that while many small deposits will tend to be distributed across the full panoply of retail banks in a given country, there is no reason why large asset purchases will be similarly evenly distributed and no reason why the managed reserve accounts and their large deposits will be. Nor is it, unless this is prohibited, necessary that the designated bank or custodian employed to manage a reserve be in the country to which the fiat currency belongs. So, while fiat currency may be ‘redeposited’ this does not definitely mitigate the impacts on balance sheets and funding for retail/commercial banks or al- leviate some of the problems of currency management for the central bank. Moreover, it clearly has implications for the efficacy of central bank policy actions.

5.3	The effectiveness of central bank policy
If we take the UK as an example, the Bank of England has a remit to focus on finan- cial stability and price stability. Taking the latter first, the Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets its ‘Bank’ or ‘Base Rate’ (the rate banks receive on their re- serves held at the Bank of England) to place a floor under money market and commer- cial lending rates, with the intention of influencing loan provision and economic activity (aiming to close an output gap informed by a DSGE without generating ‘overheating’). If retail/commercial bank business models are disrupted by new forms of money that compete with bank money, then the role of base rates in influencing monetary policy is complicated—though arguably base rates are already a weak tool for influencing price inflation and all but useless for asset inflation. In any case, cryptocurrency, unlike bank money, is not created out of debt and changes to the funding strategies of retail/ commercial banks could lead to a transition of lending to nonbanks—though this is not new since shadow banking (financing services offered by nonbanks, such as hedge funds, private equity, some corporations and other entities) already constitutes a sig- nificant proportion of most lending in many countries. While the Bank’s New Forms of Digital Money ‘illustrative scenario’ assumes banks continue to lend, the discussion paper acknowledges that these points lead to future uncertainties. More non-bank lending is a possibility and a systemic stablecoin provider acting at scale could offer credit and pay interest (Bank of England, 2021).
Turning to financial stability, the recent Financial Stability Board (FSB) report Assessment of Risks to Financial Stability from Crypto-assets suggests the main current threat stablecoin pose to financial stability is via the failure of a reserve (FSB, 2022, pp. 11–15).38 For example, liquidity mismatch between the assets held in the re- serve and volume of redemption could lead to a seemingly well-collateralised reserve


38 The report splits the threats posed into those affecting unsecured cryptocurrency, stablecoin and DeFi more broadly and decomposes vulnerabilities into exposures affecting financial institutions, wealth effects, confidence effects and payment system effects (FSB, 2022).
 
coming under pressure because of its composition. There are, in any case, numerous reasons why there might be a sudden spike in redemption, including questions raised regarding the quality of assets—especially if the reserve includes investments in other cryptocurrency or if assets are really debt instruments received from related organisa- tions with mutual vulnerabilities. Moreover, since a major current use of stablecoin is for entry and exit from investments in nonstabilised cryptocurrency, stablecoin is not insulated from the potential for collapses in those markets. It is a safe haven only in- sofar as flows in and out of cryptocurrency are relatively orderly and anticipated.
Spiralling runs on nonstabilised cryptocurrency could quickly transmit into a stam- pede into stablecoin but also to a stampede out of them, creating a feedback loop encompassing both. This, in turn, is likely to be amplified in two ways. First, insofar as investments in both cryptocurrency and derivatives of them are leveraged, losses will quickly wipe out equity and sudden massive changes in pricing are liable to wrongfoot futures markets—so margin calls will then have knock-on effects as investors start to fail.39 Second, as stablecoin grow in scale then reserves grow in scale so any sudden need by an issuer to sell assets could lead to ‘fire sale’ consequences for the markets they derive from and have knock-on effects to the valuation of assets in the stablecoin reserve (falls in value mean its securities no longer constitute a full reserve) and for key assets on other financial institutions’ balance sheets. As both these points indicate, problems with stablecoin and cryptocurrency generally have scope to spread, so it mat- ters to what degree they are integrated into the finance system. They may be sources of losses to large numbers of naïve small retail investors, but they also constitute a threat via professional investment management organisations’ development of trading and services (as they become a standard part of institutional investment portfolios) and via ‘alternative investment management’ adoption of them i.e., the development of new investment strategies by hedge funds seeking to profit from them and the use of them by hedge funds as assets against which they can collateralise their own borrowing (given standard hedge fund investment strategies can be highly leveraged).40

5.4	The latest downturn and what it suggests for regulators
As any reasonably informed reader will have realised from the above, the concern here is not use of stablecoin for payment purposes but rather the asset consequences of its management systems and their entanglement with both the broader ecosystem of cryptocurrency and finance writ large. A whole set of relations have come under pres- sure in 2022 and most problems have begun with shadow banking and lending prac- tices focused on cryptocurrency exchanges and financiers. Cryptocurrency exchanges offer ‘accounts’ and offer ‘brokerage’ services and customers can open an account,


39 According to Jon Cunliffe, Deputy Governor responsible for financial stability at the Bank of England, in May 2021: ‘There is currently more than $40 billion open interest in cryptoasset derivatives—the ma- jority of which is positioned on unregulated exchanges where margin calls can be as little as 1%.’ (Cunliffe, 2021b, p. 12). According to the FSB ‘trading on registered exchanges, such as CME, reportedly accounts only for 14% of open interest and 4% of trading volume.’ And on unregulated exchanges: ‘some contracts also feature very high levels of leverage (up to 125 times)’, though these are a minority (FSB, 2022, p. 5).
40 PwC, Elma and AIMA publish an annual crypto hedge fund report. The Q1 2021 report states
specialised crypto hedge funds had $3.8 billion assets under management in 2020, growth was rapid; 56% were using derivatives, and 27% were leveraged. Furthermore, 21% of all other hedge funds have started to invest in ‘digital assets’ (PwC, 2021). According to Coinbase, 10% of the 100 largest hedge funds used their platform in 2021.
 
borrow to buy and trade assets (on margin), and the exchange will offer an interest rate on the cryptoassets in the account (as exchanges compete for business from which fees can be charged). The US Federal Government, for example, issued ‘stimulus’ cheques to its populous during the Covid lockdowns ($1,400 in March 2021) and it seems many chose to ‘invest’ in cryptoassets, attracted by tales of instant fortunes and by interest payments on asset deposits of, in some case, well over 10%. Some crypto com- panies, meanwhile, used customer deposits (with added leverage) to invest in other crypto projects—producing a Ponzi style asset inflation effect. Use of the language of ‘accounts’ and ‘brokerage’ tends to make customers think they have an equivalent to a ‘bank account’ and that the exchange is a ‘broker’—but in legal terms this is not the case and there has been neither deposit insurance nor strict oversight of the behaviour of lenders and exchanges.
Vulnerabilities, here, are a new variant on a familiar theme of asset promotion and dissemination—a new source of potentially high returns, investors ‘seeking yield’, growing formal and informal connections, creation of nodal points or concentration of risk (often in the form of key pressure points turning on elevated debt) where a sudden change in sentiment, confidence, valuations and so on, or a need for sell-offs, creates scope for sudden contagion as failure in one place spreads to others. During 2022, a brief survey of the press picks up numerous cases of cryptocurrency companies and exchanges struggling to respond to falling valuations and there are growing num- bers of these freezing withdrawals and then entering Chapter 11 bankruptcy—for ex- ample, Celsius Network and Voyager – or experiencing stock collapses—for example, Coinbase. Voyager filed for Chapter 11 in July with $5 billion owed to 3 million people (Fortson, 2022).41
Most importantly, effects cannot be assumed to be restricted to cryptocurrency, since they may ripple through other markets and stablecoin may be one way in which this occurs. Effects will depend on the degree to which the solvency of actors is com- promised, how exactly they have positioned their investments and how their own le- verage forces them to respond. Inevitably these bleed into the balance sheets of banking and this has larger consequences than the proportionate scale of the particular sector. Hence, all of the main commentator organisations—central banks, the FSB, BIS, IMF etc. – have begun over the last couple of years to explicitly acknowledge that while cryptocurrency may only be a tiny fraction of total financial assets in the world (about
$2.6 trillion at the end of 2021, of which around $157 billion were stablecoin, com- pared to approximately $250 trillion in total financial assets) sub-prime mortgages and Collateralised Debt Obligations (CDOs) were around the same proportion just prior to the global financial crisis (for context see Bank of England staff speeches: Cunliffe, 2021a, 2021b; Segal-Knowles, 2021). Reports suggest that value of cryptocurrency as a whole peaked at $2.8 billion, but by mid-2022 this had fallen to $1.2 trillion.42
Clearly, there is a financial stability threat and thus a policy challenge. If we stick with the UK as an example, the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) is responsible for overseeing financial stability at a systemic level and sets macroprudential policy, while the Prudential Regulation Committee (PRC) sets

41 Consider the connections: in May 2022 two linked cryptocurrency, Terra and Luna, started to collapse, the hedge fund Three Arrows Capital was heavily invested in Luna and in June defaulted on a $670 million loan obtained from Voyager; Voyager then froze withdrawals (Fortson, 2022).
42 To be clear though, cryptocurrency has been through collapses before and the potential of the tech-
nology does not reduce to the fortunes of current formats.
 
microprudential policy. The PRC is informed by the Prudential Regulation Authority (PRA), which supervises financial institutions and, separately from the Bank but with a seat on the PRC, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), which is responsible for consumer/client protection (Morgan, 2022b). As the scale of cryptocurrency grows and it becomes more connected with and integrated into finance beyond its own sector it becomes a significant macroeconomic consideration. The FPC does not intervene directly in the activities of financial entities. Instead, it issues communi- ques regarding emerging risks to ensure that key actors are aware that there may be a need to modify behaviour and it can also direct the PRC/PRA and the FCA to act on its behalf to curb lending activity and practices in particular sectors. As such, it seeks to create circuit-breakers and to intervene in a counter-cyclical fashion prior to the onset of contagions.
However, it is arguable whether the PRC or FPC are equipped or disposed to address rather than identify and acknowledge potential problems. In a microprudential sense, while ‘resilience’ measures such as enhanced capital retention under Basel III are intended to absorb unexpected losses on bank balance sheets, such measures are indicative of a system that accepts credit cycles will occur and lending may ultimately lead to widespread defaults. Resilience mainly seeks to protect the bank from the worst outcomes of its own decision making and the state from bailouts (though it clearly has not prevented central banks extending services which make them, as arms of the state, more responsible for underwriting the finance system—as the work of Daniela Gabor (2020) notes). In a macroprudential context, meanwhile, effective measures may con- front a conflict of interest. The FPC is required to take account of current govern- ment economic policy (its growth strategy) and if the growth model of an economy is financialised then the very terms of growth are built around credit and financial asset expansion. Given a range of pre-emptive responses, from highly cautious and pruden- tial early intervention to communiques and a ‘wait and see’ approach, the FPC seems more liable to tend to the latter (and it is notable that the FPC has so far been reluctant to use directives).
In any case, cryptocurrency adds yet another area that the Bank must monitor – ac- quiring timely data on problematic trends etc., deliberating on the possible systemic consequences, adding these to its stress tests, formulating appropriate mechanisms that might be implemented via directives and so on. Much of the current financial system seeks to make this difficult. So, while sovereign spaces matter, they are not sites of monolithic power and uncontested agency. Hedge funds, for example, position themselves in order to limit scope for regulators and supervision to place restrictions on their investment focus, strategies, fees and leverage. Hedge funds are a problem for bank balance sheets through their ‘shadow banking’ relations and as financialisation theorists note, shadow banking has made the finance system more complex and ex- acerbated a known unknown—we know that endogenous financing processes involve inherent instabilities and that trends can be tracked and tendencies identified, but there is a basic uncertainty regarding where and when turning points in processes might occur that lead to contagions and possible crisis. Uncertainty is different than statistically determinable ‘risk’, so the Bank has a basic meta-theoretical or ontological challenge and a more prosaic adequacy of information challenge in terms of its data— and both are arguably complicated for cryptocurrency insofar as it has multiple uses and contexts—many of which are international or global—such as cross-border pay- ments. Clearly, policy challenges translate into demands for regulation, but before we
 
turn to this there is one final area of potential disruption and this one involves data in a more mundane sense.

5.5	Data, security and the payments system
The previous section highlights that stablecoin is one component in cryptocurrency’s more complicated set of connections and potentials. However, much of this turns on the connection between its attractions as a stable form of payment and cryptocurrency’s attraction as a speculative asset. A systemic stablecoin promulgated by a major multi- national corporation or consortium of corporations adds a new layer of concern to an existent problem of privacy and security of data, and by extension, security of the pay- ments system. Stablecoin adds a further source of data that corporations can monetise. Equally, it adds a further area of vulnerability to fraud, data corruption, hacks, data theft and ransom attacks. And insofar as a systemic stablecoin might lead to monopoly activity it may not only lead to (in practical terms if not in technical terms) a ‘closed loop’ payments system, but also a reduction in diversity of payments, which if un- checked itself becomes a vulnerability if the system were to be compromised for some period of time (especially if cash continues to decline). For all these reasons regulators are developing strategies to cope with a systemic stablecoin.
However, the issue of data and security is already a live one and countries are having to come to terms with the way cryptocurrency providers are seeking to develop their exchanges within current existent regulation. Some of this involves ‘move and counter- move’. For example, the cryptocurrency exchange Binance entered a partnership with the online payments company Paysafe in February 2022. Paysafe is part of the UK’s Faster Payments Service and the association allows customers to deposit Sterling pay- ments at the exchange via the UK payments system—despite the FCA previously excluding Binance (Martin, 2022). The FCA thus finds itself having to reconsider how partnerships can create exposures.
There are then multiple ways in which stablecoin and cryptocurrency may cause disruptions to the existent state of affairs. Arguably these decompose along two lines:
i.	The scope for disruptions created by rapid change.
ii.	The possibility that any new situation where stablecoin becomes a widespread means of payment will have new problematic features because of the nature of the newly transitioned system.
Clearly, the former can lead to more or less change and change can be more or less transformational, affecting what is the case in the latter sense (new ways in which in- stability can occur and crises can be triggered). And just as clearly, this depends to some degree on how regulators respond to stablecoin and cryptocurrency.

6.	New Regulation and the case for a CBDC

6.1	Regulatory principles
The future rarely unfolds as anticipated and technological change does not proceed in some deterministic fashion, much depends on how technologies are used and re- fused and a great deal of this can be unforeseen. Regulation, however, matters since it provides a framework that may be more or less permissive. While cryptocurrency may
 
ultimately come to nothing, regulators cannot assume this and so must plan for eventu- alities and seek to impose their will on the future, according to prevailing understand- ings of the purpose and practice of regulation in the context of informed speculation regarding likely consequences of whatever it is they are concerned with. Most gov- ernments of major economies, their central banks and other interested regulators, are exploring options for the regulation and supervision of cryptocurrency and stablecoin, as well as any modifications to legislation this may require. In the UK this includes the Bank of England, FCA and HM Treasury (e.g. Bank of England, 2020, 2021; HM Treasury, 2021). As the references scattered through this paper indicate, work is also developing in relation to research and initiatives from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS), International Monetary Fund (IMF) and Financial Stability Board (FSB), as well as the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), Financial Action Task Force (FATF), the EU, the G7 and G20 (e.g. G7 WGS, 2019; European Commission, 2020; FSB, 2020; CPMI-IOSCO, 2021).
As much of the discussion over previous sections indicates, there is a distinction between use of cryptocurrency as an asset for investment portfolio purposes and its use as a money in relation to given payments systems. These imply different concerns for regulators and come under the purview of different supervisors. Stablecoin ultim- ately involves concerns regarding its role in the development of alternative payment systems. In the UK, for example, the Bank of England supervises the core infrastruc- ture for authorisation, clearing and settlement of ‘systemically important payment systems’. The Bank is concerned with the continuity and adequacy of the payment system i.e., any issue that may materially disrupt or undermine a payment system’s capacity to meet payments. More generally, payments sits within a set of internation- ally agreed standards or goals that cover not just payment systems, but an array of key services involving management and payment, such as securities deposits, central coun- terparties etc. These standards are issued jointly by the BIS Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and IOSCO, and are termed the ‘Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures’. In the UK, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), meanwhile, is concerned with consumer protection from poor practice etc. within payments systems. Finally, following the Financial Services (Bank Reform) Act 2013, the Payment Systems Regulator (PSR) was created as recognition that methods of payment in the UK had become diverse and there was a need to regulate to maintain fair competition for payment provision. The PSR became active in 2015 and now sits alongside the existent Competition & Markets Authority.
So, there are a range of regulators with an interest in how stablecoin might de- velop and grow. Each is concerned with how stablecoin might impact on their remit, whether their current powers cover the relevant providers, whether they have super- visory powers, whether providers are compliant and so on. Regulators and supervisors generally acknowledge they are still playing catch-up. The consensus, however, is that there is a need to respond quickly insofar as cryptocurrency is growing quickly, that the response requires global coordination in order to limit regulatory arbitrage (especially where there is scope for cross-border activity or for a provider to be registered in one jurisdiction and active in another) and that regulation should be informed by the prin- ciple ‘same risk same regulatory outcome’ i.e., any new form of digital money must be regulated according to the same goals and standards as existing forms (allowing for differences of technology that impact on adequacy of regulation—which, of course, surely applies to DLT).
 
In terms of stablecoin in the UK, the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) has taken a lead and its ‘stablecoin expectations’ have informed the recent HM Treasury stablecoin consultation document (HM Treasury, 2021).43 HM Treasury suggests that stablecoin come under the relevant remits of the FCA and PSR and that the Bank of England’s powers be extended under the Banking Act 2009 to encompass the reserve activity of stablecoin issuers. The Bank’s New Forms of Digital Money sets out four different regulatory options – requiring issuers to be authorised as banks, re- quiring issuance to be settled in central bank reserves (high powered money), requiring reserves to be backed by approved HQLA, and requiring the issuer to operate in con- junction with (i.e., deposit at) an approved retail/commercial bank with access to the central bank reserve system (Bank of England, 2021, pp. 52–61). Clearly, each of these places slightly different requirements on stablecoin issuers, but the purposes of all of them is to bring reserve management under the auspices of the Bank in order to ensure adequate governance, collateralisation and subsequent scope to manage any sudden li- quidity problems.44 Each provides a potential solution to the problems encapsulated by the questions, ‘is the reserve full’, ‘what is it full of’ and ‘how sufficient is a full reserve’. The Bank of England has then, begun to develop options to address microprudential and macroprudential concerns, as have many other central banks. Still, lacunae re- main, for example, the previous regulatory options leave outstanding the problem of retail/commercial bank reserve drain effects, disintermediation, redeposit problems and funding issues. There is work on this at the Bank but little progress in terms of policy preferences using that work (for the models see Kumhof and Noone, 2018). There is, furthermore, as yet little real recognition of the strategies a coalition of major corporations might use to create market dominance and how these strategies might be addressed (regulation is no more set up to deal with this than it has been with the broader socio-economic consequences of Big Tech around the world). Moreover, as Jon Cunliffe, deputy governor of the Bank responsible for financial stability has ob- served in recent speeches, there is a notable absence of regulatory urgency despite ac- knowledgement that change is rapid (2021b). This, of course, may change in the near
future.


43 ‘The FPC set out two expectations for stablecoin-based payment chains: ‘Payment chains that use stablecoins should be regulated to standards equivalent to those applied to traditional payment chains. Firms in stablecoin-based systemic payment chains that are critical to their functioning should be regulated accordingly. Where stablecoins are used in systemic payment chains as money-like instruments they should meet standards equivalent to those expected of commercial bank money in relation to stability of value, ro- bustness of legal claim and the ability to redeem at par in fiat’ (HM Treasury, 2021, p. 16).
44 The discussion paper also sets out the powers the Bank has or could have: ‘Under the 2009 Banking
Act it can require the issuer/operator to pay attention to the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructure (PFMI) which sets out a risk framework. The Bank can issue Codes of Practice to which they must adhere. The Bank can impose a supervisory programme (meetings with Boards of Directors, review of risk areas etc. exploring governance and resilience of IT, Cyber security and risk planning etc.). The Bank can impose a principle of Bank consultation and “non-objection” prior to significant changes to the system. The Bank can apply sanctions and demand changes to systems and rules’ (Bank of England, 2021, p. 66). More generally, the discussion paper sets out the need for clear legal claim (allowing stablecoin holders to redeem their money), capital requirements and liquidity (establishing the organisation is solvent and able to meet its obligations in a timely fashion) and support to maintain capital and liquidity (access to arrange- ments from a central bank if necessary etc.), as well as a ‘backstop’ (a mechanism or procedure to cover a situation of failure of the stablecoin issuer or some significant part of its network – related to deposit in- surance such as FSCS, bail-ins and resolution, but also perhaps transfer of customers etc. and information and compliance procedures to enable effective monitoring to ensure appropriate governance (see Bank of England, 2021, p. 67).
 
Still, there is also a notable absence of comprehensive approaches able to address the integrations of cryptocurrency and stablecoin into payment systems and portfolios and, discussion of global principles notwithstanding, a notable lack of timely progress on coordination at the international level. It is worth emphasising here that different coun- tries have different concerns, resources and interests—cryptocurrency is a very different proposition to El Salvador than it is for the US or UK—and it would be naïve to think that lobbying from powerful financial firms will have no influence on the development of regulation in major financial centres.45 Sovereign spaces matter, and coordination may seem like a good idea in the abstract, but states are not mere innocent victims of preda- tory practices. Regulatory arbitrage is not necessarily exploitation of opportunity created by a difference whose consequences were unforeseen. Some seem more deliberate and one only need look to the effects of decades of corporate tax avoidance behaviour in the context of some kinds of ‘tax competition’ to appreciate this, albeit there may now finally be a shift in regulatory attitude regarding such avoidance (Morgan, 2021b).

6.2	The case for CBDC
The many and varied issues arising from widespread adoption of stablecoin have pro- vided one important strand in the case for development of a central bank digital cur- rency (CBDC). There are several different approaches to CBDC, but the common thread that is most relevant in the context of private stablecoin is that the central bank issues a digital money in addition to cash (and in the long term perhaps to replace it), which unlike the central bank reserve system, ordinary people have access to and which is built around a DLT technology.This ‘retail CBDC’ is for household and non-financial corporation business use, rather than ‘wholesale CBDC’. Depending on design, such a CBDC potentially solves several problems associated with a systemic stablecoin. First, since it is issued by the central bank as a denomination of the money of account, there is no concern regarding its capacity to maintain a par valuation (it is simply another version of the currency). Second, since it is issued by and backed in some form by the central bank, there is no concern regarding the failure of a reserve (because of adequacy of its composition, governance etc.). The CBDC is as safe as the central bank. Third, because the central bank delivers the technology, then the core payment architecture is under the control of a responsible known quantity, reducing concerns over standards, exploitation, manipulation and data security (so CBDC allows emphasis to be placed on the techno- logical benefits rather than drawbacks of new forms of digital money). Fourth, insofar as retail/commercial banks continue to exist, CBDC provides a new complementary source of access to state money if there should be disruption to their payments systems, and it offers potential financial inclusion for the previously unbanked. Fifth, the CBDC, in co- ordination with other central banks (potentially via their own CBDC) gives greater con- trol over (and speed of) cross-border payments (preventing problems of circumvention). Sixth, the CBDC may be used as a direct transmission channel to further monetary policy (whereas stablecoin complicates transmission).46

45 Nayib Bukele, the president of El Salvador initially responded to the collapse in Bitcoin in 2022 by suggesting it was a buying opportunity. However matters beyond the control of the state have kicked in, and Fitch has downgraded the country’s credit to junk status.
46 See also Carney (2021, pp. 110–119) and Prasad (2021, pp. 193–238). There is also scope for more rad- ical use of CBDC as a way to pursue income and wealth equalising policy by directly crediting the account of eligible poorer account holders. This might complement some of the potentials of programmable money discussed earlier.
 
As of early 2022 more than ninety central banks were ‘exploring’ CBDCs and seven had already adopted variants (Hosking, 2022).47 The US, for example, has been dis- cussing retail CBDC as a possible means to maintain the dominance of the US$ as a global reserve currency, and China has been discussing how a CBDC might inter- nationalise its currency and undermine that dominance (Federal Reserve, 2022; Wang, 2022).48 The Bank of England set out its initial thinking in March 2020 (Bank of England, 2020). This has subsequently been dubbed ‘Britcoin’. Among the design op- tions, the Bank’s ‘illustrative model’ opts for a hybrid system or ‘platform model’. The Bank provides a CBDC within a core DLT infrastructure which it maintains and then eligible organisations provide a ‘payment interface’ on their own platforms through which customers make use of the CBDC. So, to the public the system may look like any other digital payments system on a commercial platform. However, if Britcoin became available, the public would have direct access to accounts (wallets) of digital central bank money (whereas previously they only had access to cash) and this service would sit beside the existent retail/commercial bank reserve system. The Bank argues this solution is most compatible with its guiding design principles—the Bank does what it is best at (providing a financial stability solution)—while commercial entities are left able to innovate, diversify and compete for custom (including the potential for providers to add overlay services and make use of the technological potentials of digital money, such as micropayments and smart contracts, albeit the latter may have implica- tions for the design of the underlying technology offered by the Bank).49
One might note that this kind of solution may be one reason why Facebook/Meta ultimately decided not to proceed with Diem. In any case, the Bank is aware that there is no problem-free alternative to stablecoin. Most notably, the promulgation of a re- tail CBDC replaces the problem of reserve drains for retail/commercial banks based on adoption of stablecoin with a similar possible disintermediation through migration from bank deposits to CBDC accounts (wallets). It may make sense for all deposits in excess of deposit insurance at retail/commercial banks to migrate. Moreover, the more attractive CBDC becomes, the greater the problem this creates. As the Bank notes, this has two aspects, one of which is mundane and one of which is within the context of situations of distress. First, if the Bank wants to use its CBDC for monetary policy transmission then the most direct way to do this is to pay interest (‘remunerate’) on CBDC accounts. This, however, competes with retail/commercial bank deposits and gives an additional reason to substitute into CBDC, thereby increasing the scope for reserve drains. Second, the option to transfer bank deposits into CBDC potentially provides a new channel by which bank runs can, depending on cause, begin or accel- erate. If there is concern over one or several banks and deposit insurance is insufficient to cover sums or allay fears, CBDC gives a new and rapid channel for flight to safety (in principle far faster than queuing outside a bank to withdraw cash since it could be done at the push of a button), since CBDC is a version of state money and so deemed

47 Boston Consulting Group maintains a CBDC tracker. Visit: https://cbdctracker.org
48 China, for example, began testing out a CBDC at the Winter Olympics and has been experimenting with a ‘red envelope’ system. The BIS has a site devoted to development of facilities for inter-CBDC pay- ments or multiple CBDC (‘mCBDC’).Visit: https://www.bis.org/about/bisih/topics/cbdc/mcbdc_bridge.htm 49 For example, the Bank discusses issues of CBDC payments functionality: the system must be able to cope with push (initiated by the payer) and pull (initiated by the recipient) payments, one-off and recur- ring payments, bulk payments (such as payroll) and ‘point of sale’ systems where merchants are accessing the payments system via the payments interface provider’s platform in real time and where internet access
maybe patchy (Bank of England, 2020, p. 28).
 
a risk-free destination for flight to safety. Addressing this potential leads to debate re- garding limits on deposits and design options that encourage CBDC use for payments but not for significant store of value.
The Bank describes the design issues for CBDC as policy ‘trade-off’ problems. According to a recent UK House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee report, how- ever, CBDC is a ‘solution in search of a problem’ that creates vulnerabilities for the central bank, and hence, the state (EAC, 2022). A CBDC makes possible a customer run on retail/commercial banks which decades of banking regulation and central bank practice have made unlikely (the major concern today is disruption of short-term funding in money markets). If the aim is to make payment systems more resilient (in the event of a problem with retail/commercial bank’s role in payment systems) then this seems counterproductive and if the aim is to forestall a systemic stablecoin this could more easily be addressed through legislation and regulation to control or prevent such digital money. Moreover, the claim that CBDC is as safe as the central bank may be true, but a CBDC may create new channels by which a central bank can be hacked by criminals and hostile governments and so CBDC may be making the Bank actively less safe. There is no guarantee, furthermore, that data is safe with the central bank or that the system prevents abuse of payments (exploitation of users, money laundering) in the interface providers’ overlay—and one can (despite the Bank’s commitment to imposing standards on participants) readily imagine worst case scenarios of techno- logically driven state and market failures here.
For our purposes, however, both issues of CBDC design and the range of regula- tory responses to cryptocurrency and stablecoin are an important reminder of a core insight. As Jon Cunliffe states, ‘Money is not only a social convention, it is a very dynamic one. The forms it can take and the uses to which it can be put have varied materially through history and between societies’ (Cunliffe, 2021a, p. 3). It is dan- gerously obfuscating to use the term ‘money’ as though its meaning were simple and self-evident and then simply move on. Money is contextual, it is social, legal, and pol- itical as much as economic. As such, its contested future is a reminder that money is historic, and this brings us finally to underlying issues of cryptocurrency, stablecoin and the nature of money and this is a matter of philosophy and social theory.

7.	Stablecoin and the nature of money: positioning and process
As we noted in the introduction, cryptocurrency and stablecoin are ultimately simply the latest context in which longstanding issues of the nature of money can be explored. This typically begins with (in mainstream thinking) issues of if and how well functions of money (unit of account, store of value and medium of exchange and the discharging of debt) are achieved. As we also noted early on, extreme variation (and expectation of extreme vari- ation) in the value of non-stabilised cryptocurrencies is an obvious barrier to adoption. If values are rising rapidly a ‘money’ is hoarded according to logics of speculative wealth as- sets. It is not treated as or used as a means of payment. If values fall rapidly then potential recipients are deterred from accepting the ‘money’ for future use. It lacks store of value. If value is highly volatile, varying up and down rapidly, then value cannot be relied upon for transaction purposes.The further implication is that if an existent ‘money’ cannot maintain relative stability of value then it will start to fail as a general means of payment, and if it is a candidate ‘money’ it will fail to be adopted as a general means of payment. In either case it will be dysfunctional and, if this persists, will be deemed a failed money.
 
The very introduction of stablecoin as an alternative cryptocurrency is a recognition of the importance of store of value. Moreover, the current main use of stablecoin for entry and exit into cryptoasset markets is a reminder of a basic tension in regard of ‘moneyness’ and treatment of assets. Money may well be part of liquidity preference and a putative currency may have attractive investment attributes insofar as its value varies against other currencies, but a currency (whether it be Bitcoin or the Rouble) is not an especially functional ‘money’ if it is continually exchanged for something else because it cannot or has not achieved stable store of value. Ultimately there is some level of speculative activity that is either indicative of or a catalyst for the failure of a ‘money’.50
Now, early on we also suggested that our reference to what money means was ‘cir- cular’, and we said we would return to this. Clearly, the inference to be drawn is that money is defined in terms of its ability to act as a means of payment and in its most de- veloped form as a general means of payment, and that for this to be the case it must act as a stable store of value. Equally as clearly, a money requires a unit in which to be de- nominated and so it presupposes a unit of account. If a unit cannot facilitate uses de- scribable as serving as a general means of payment it will not warrant classification as money in terms of ordinary language use. The existence of a unit without some means for it to be an active accounting system, standing behind the many and various activ- ities that might be categorised as payment, does not rise to the level of what anyone would recognise as a currently operational ‘money’. If no unit had this quality of gen- eral acceptance then there would be no pricing or any other form of exchange valuing as we observe it in the kinds of societies we live in. At the same time, a payment system is not itself a money merely by being a payments system – PayPal is not a money, it is a service that depends on and extends use of a money. What does all this suggest?
Superficially it suggests that conjointly fulfilling the functions of money in some adequate way is indicative of what money ‘is’. However, identifying the functions of money is no more than a first step in determining what money ‘is’. Fulfilling the func- tions points to something more fundamental, since there must be a process that both creates and fulfils functions and to neglect this is to neglect what makes money both possible and significant. As Schumpeter noted years ago, what money ‘does’ is not quite the same order of question as what money ‘is’, though clearly the two are not unrelated. Many theorists of money have, of course, highlighted that money is historic (for a history of money see Davies, 2016), it is a constituted socially directed tech- nology and, as such, has conceivably achieved functions in different ways at different times (for a range of positions on theory of money see Knapp, 1905; Mitchell-Innes, 1913, 1914; Keynes, 1930; Galbraith, 1975; Ingham, 2004; Simmel, 2004 [1907]; Goodhart, 2005; Ryan-Collins et al., 2012; Hook, 2022).51 One of the more interesting recent interventions, however, has been Tony Lawson’s application to money of his social positioning theory (Lawson, 2016, 2018a, 2018b, 2019a, 2022; Lawson and Morgan, 2021b; Pratten, 2022).



50 This, of course, is a conditional and contingent point regarding any potential money, since no currency is permanently and wholly stable. There is, for example, continuous trading in currency both for hedges in international trade and as a source of yield without this resulting in all currencies becoming failed money.
51 For a useful annotated bibliography see Mellor (2019, pp. 158–165).
 
7.1	Money and social positioning theory
Lawson seeks to make a simple and intuitive point, money is an aspect of social reality and, as such, the first and primary question to ask is, what kind of theory of social reality makes sense of money? This constitutes a turn to social ontology, a subject, of course, for which he is well-known (Lawson, 2019a; Lawson and Morgan, 2021a). But in this case, the turn to ontology allows for a series of clarifications. Most notably, re- garding the consistency of claims about what is currently used as money in relation to what claims are made for the nature of money rather than for a particular instance of money (in time and place).
Lawson argues that a primary feature of social reality is ‘communities’, by which he does not mean community in the loose ordinary language sense (of grouped fellow feeling), but rather (broadly understood) sets of relations which have a way of working and which achieve some given end(s) i.e., a social ontology of the constitution of so- ciety and its subsets theorised in terms of organised purpose. Communities have ‘posi- tions’ and these are occupied by persons or things that are allocated to those positions. The positions are constituted as deontic powers taking the form of bundles of rights and obligations. According to Lawson what money ‘achieves’, its function, is to serve as a general means to discharge or cancel debt. This is explicit when a debt is formally recognised (payment of the principal or interest on a loan, payment of tax etc.), and implicit when an exchange of a commodity for money occurs.52
Lawson argues the existence of debt presupposes a community system of accounting whose unit of account provides the unit of value in which debt, assets and money itself can be denominated. However, the existence of such a unit is insufficient for money, as understood by Lawson, to emerge—as such he differentiates his concep- tualisation from the longer history of the development of money (see Graeber, 2011; Davies, 2016).53 The formation of a money requires the addition of a ‘money position’ constituted as a specific package of rights and obligations to which some appropriate kind of entity is allocated. These rights and obligations ensure that money everywhere functions as the accepted general means of payment, of cancelling existing debts. They include the right to use whatever has been allocated to the ‘money position’ as a means to discharge debts and the obligation to (subject to conditions) accept whatever has been allocated to the ‘money position’ as a positioned entity or money. Quite when this innovation occurred is itself a matter of historical dispute—do ancient Mesopotamian small clay tablets inscribed with early stylised images of numbers of bushels of wheat and small casks of beer, or the use of ‘hack silver’ by Vikings and Saxons, count as money according to this positioning theory of money?
In any case, for Lawson, positioning is only essential for the constitution of money. An adequately functioning money depends additionally on the capacities of the oc- cupant of the money position. Specifically, a characteristic of a successful occupier of the money position is its capacity to underpin or ground stable store of value. This, of course, can be contingent and Lawson is careful to distinguish a successful from a failed money. In either case the money position retains an occupant, if a money is constituted. Concomitantly, Lawson makes much of the need for trust in both the

52 Lawson intends to highlight that the occupant of the money position need not itself be debt, even if it is a feature of the money position that it acts as a discharger of debt. See later.
53 Historians sometimes differentiate the existence of ‘money things’, able to achieve some of what money
can, from a fully developed rule system of money.
 
constitution of the money position and of whatever has been allocated to the position (to facilitate a money with a stable value). Of course, many money theorists (and as previous discussion indicates most central banks) place great emphasis on trust (see also Dodd, 1994; Mellor, 2019), but in Lawson’s case trust is emphasised as a basic feature of great swathes of social activity (a ‘social glue’—see also Lawson, 2001; Colledge et al., 2014; Morgan and Sheehan, 2015; Pratten, 2017).
To summarise and elaborate a little, for Lawson, a trusted successful occupier of the money position, as positioned occupant or money, under given conditions, has ‘nominal properties’: it is a general means of payment and, when it functions successfully as a general means of payment (existing debt discharger) it also has generalised purchasing power (and people are prepared to undertake new debts using it).54 This money is widely accepted and thus transferable from person to person and situation to situation. Continuing success or functional adequacy requires the continuous reproduction of trust that money will have the property of stable and liquid store of value—thereby enabling community members who hold money to continue to hold it (‘save’) and use it and for others to receive it and for both (the giver and recipient) to do so with confidence. This (trust-confidence) is a quality that augments the constitutive rights and obligations relations for a well-functioning money.55 Such considerations, in turn, draws attention to what Lawson refers to as existent community specific features of the money position and its instantiation in broader systems—since, if we look to the modern world, trust depends on community responses to the activity of organisa- tions with formal responsibility for the stability of money, payments and the finance system (i.e., designated organisations tasked by statute with regulatory and super- visory powers) and informally on both the activity of existent financial actors (banks etc.) and the introduction of new innovations, such as potential new candidates for the money position. This brings us back to cryptocurrency and stablecoin.

7.2	Cryptocurrency, trust and the money position dispute with credit theorists
In a recent paper Lawson takes the opportunity provided by cryptocurrency and stablecoin to reiterate his social positioning theory of money and to make the case for its insights and claims (Lawson, 2019b). In particular, he highlights:
The challenge, then, for those seeking to render a form(s) of cryptocurrency as money lies both in getting it positioned as a legitimate means of payment (governed by relevant rights and obli- gations ensuring this) and so also trusted in the sense that if positioned as money it can serve as a store of liquid value (Lawson, 2019b, p. 16).
He suggests briefly that new technology raises the question of what trust is placed in—formal sources of authority or in technology? In either case trust must still be given and a successful money must still have the required nominal properties. One might

54 Note, Lawson also uses the term ‘nominal essence’ for these properties and the term ‘real essence’ for ‘the property of being a component of the accounting system constituted by way of organising structure in the form of specific positional rights and obligations of the sort noted that render it a general means of pay- ment.’ (Lawson and Morgan, 2021b, p. 212). On organisation see Slade-Caffarel (2022).
55 Moreover, trust theorists note that trust makes possible interaction that would be bureaucratically slow,
or impossible, if participants to relations were forced to continually rely on close monitoring and formal en- forcement of laws and regulations etc. because counterparties as a matter of course attempted to defraud or exploit. And this situation is exacerbated if law itself becomes open to corruption; though, of course, as any Marxist might note, authority and acceptance can be ideological and so trust is not necessarily indicative of justice.
 
add here that trust is highly contingent. Stablecoin is different from nonstabilised cryptocurrency (cryptoassets) in terms of key features, and thus in terms of how trust is inculcated. As we noted earlier, the original stated purpose of cryptocurrency was to bypass the state, central banks and the banking system (using a permissionless nonhierarchical and open source distributed system). Distrust of the status quo was used as a justification to advocate trust in technology—implying trust is being given differently. However, stablecoin are permissioned and hierarchical and, insofar as the dominant version is reserve based and asset backed, a systemic version of stablecoin implies closer integration of a dominant cryptocurrency into banking and finance. In any case, cryptoassets in general are increasingly being absorbed into the investment practices of banks and financial management services.
As we have also emphasised, new technologies may confront the state and its regu- lators with new challenges, but the state still matters. As all of the discussion drawing on work from the FSB, IMF and central banks indicates, threats to the provision of money, integrity of the payments system, efficacy of policy and financial stability cannot be ignored and most countries seek to anticipate problems even if they often respond with lack of urgency (not least because financialisation has made the finance system more complex and the problem of oversight and intervention practically more difficult and theoretically more questionable—since a strand of mainstream thinking invites hesitation, given intervention may distort markets and prevent new efficiencies). So, one might suggest then that the ongoing adoption of cryptocurrency seems to be involving accommodations to, rather than rejection of, existent broader systems and current community specific features of the money position. As such, quite what will be trusted as technology is—to adapt a phrasing from Clive Lawson and his Technology and Isolation (Lawson, C., 2017)—‘enrolled within existing social dependencies’ (a dialectic) remains an open question.
Moving on, Tony Lawson also notes the current occupiers of the money position are central and commercial/retail bank debt and there is scope here to highlight some of the emerging differences with cryptocurrency as a candidate occupant of the money position. As we have previously highlighted commercial/retail bank money (hereafter just bank money) is created when a bank extends a loan, since this results in a matching deposit.The borrower is typically unaware that what they have are new Santander units etc., since these are denominated in the unit of account and the central bank has committed to ensuring they exchange at par with money as positioned central bank debt. This is a commitment that is most visible when on exchanging newly created units we obtain markers of the money as positioned central bank debt in the form now of cash. The fact that this is an ex- change of one kind of money (one occupant) for another is typically, however, something the borrower is unaware of. In any case, this bank money arrives as a positioned debt of the bank marked by cash. The cash is then used as a transferable carrier for credit-debt re- lations (in which payment discharges a momentary situation of debt).56
56 Lawson highlights the Michell-Innes emphasis that, rather than a thing with intrinsic value because of its commodity form, a physical representation of money is a token representing a ‘sacred obligation’. Michell- Innes uses this phrase in relation to the statement, ‘What A owes to B is A’s debt to B and B’s credit on A. A is B’s debtor and B is A’s creditor. The words “credit” and “debt” express a legal relationship between two parties, and they express the same legal relationship seen from two opposite sides.’ (1913, p. 392). While a commodity is exchanged for debt in a credit–debt relation, one might note also that payment is a momentary situation of provision of a credit whose converse is a situation of debt which is cancelled as and when the basis of the exchange is fulfilled—a product is handed over, a service is rendered, a property right is trans- ferred etc.—hence any candidate money acts as a transferable carrier for credit-debt relations, blending the discharger of debt function into other aspects of means of payment.
 
Cryptocurrency in general and stablecoin in particular differ from bank money in various ways. For example, Bitcoin is produced by rules and is not backed by anything, so in this sense it is similar to fiat currency (there is no attempt to back it with some form of metal standard, it is brought into being by rules that parallel proclamation). However, its digital tokens (the currency) are a finite product of the algorithm (limited to 21 million) and are issued as rewards to miners in the DLT blockchain process. As such, the tokens are not a product of borrowing, i.e., debt creation, nor is the money ‘destroyed’ when an originating debt is discharged, since no such debt exists, it is simply transferred from one wallet to another. Clearly, though, Bitcoin can, in prin- ciple, fulfil the function of ‘destroying’ bank money if it is accepted for payment of a loan, and just as clearly, when something is paid for, Bitcoin is transferred through credit-debt relations in the form of transactions when acting as a means of payment—it is a token with an assigned value. Tether, by contrast is backed by its reserve, and, in principle, this is, unlike bank money, ‘full’. Moreover, since the stablecoin is issued in a 1:1 relation with deposited fiat currency, there is a clear relationship between the issu- ance of the stablecoin and money likely created out of debt and, given the 1:1 relation, the stablecoin is for all intents and purposes destroyed when fiat currency is redeemed (e.g. Tether is exchanged for the US$ from the issuer). As with the issue of trust, how- ever, it is not yet clear what form any widespread cryptocurrency or stablecoin variant that does in fact come to occupy the money position successfully will take.
Though the future of cryptocurrency is not yet clear its existent versions do allow
further comment on one of the main current arguments regarding the historicity of money and a further useful distinction Lawson makes. For Lawson, the fundamentals of money are deceptively simple, yet underappreciated. It is the process of positioning that constitutes ‘money’. It is, as such, potentially misleading to answer basic questions regarding the ontology of money by focusing solely on the characteristics of what has been allocated to the money position, since this likely obfuscates that the ‘money’ is a positioned form of whatever has been allocated. And Lawson insists that wherever positioning is involved the positioned item has relational properties that the positioned entity lacks. It is the rights and obligations that explain money’s functioning as a gen- eral means of payment that constitute its real nature. This has led to dispute with credit theorists, insofar as they argue that historically money has always been debt, that the explanation of money’s uses lie in the nature of debt as debt, and examples to the contrary misconstrue the evidence (Peacock, 2017; Ingham, 2018). Lawson’s point is that even where money is debt/credit it is positioned debt/credit—hence he refers to a ‘money theory of credit’, rather than a ‘credit theory of money’. It is the process of positioning that makes it an occupier of the money position (and thus makes the posi- tioned occupier ‘money’) rather than any characteristics or properties of the thing that is positioned (though, as Lawson also points out, and to reiterate, clearly the charac- teristics of the thing that occupies a position can affect how the position achieves what it does and the occupier can be more or less suited to what it does—and both central bank and retail/commercial bank money are by design suited to their purpose; and re- tail/commercial bank money comes into existence denominated in the unit of account, backed by the state in various ways).
Arguably, the significance of what Lawson is claiming is somewhat obscured, ironic-
ally by his occasional excursions into historical discussion and examples. Much of the debate has focused on whether in fact commodities have been money (which are not also debt/credit). He argues, for example, that there are examples, such as tobacco in
 
Virginia. But it is worth pointing out that the plausibility of his argument does not turn on whether he is right about specific examples, it turns on two things. First, whether, in principle, there can be occupiers of the money position that are not forms of debt/ credit. Second, whether the money position is more than merely a figure of speech for the use of forms of debt/credit. So critics would need to establish both that debt/credit is a necessary feature of any candidate money and that a money is not in some sense a positioning of debt to do something debt would otherwise not do—act as transferable or general means of payment.57
Clearly, cryptocurrency and stablecoin create new grounds for dispute regarding the properties of occupiers of the money position. But even if credit theorists are found to be correct that debt/credit is a necessary feature of any viable occupant, this in it- self does not mean accommodating a social positioning theory into theory of money would have no benefits, since as the second point above indicates, it still provides a novel attempt to theorise how money is constituted and why it is held. It is one (not the only) attempt to locate money within broader social theory able to make sense of its historicity and social relationality (something that, in any case, almost all of the more interesting theorists have tried to do – see list of references provided earlier).58
The accommodation, moreover, may be mutual. Lawson’s approach to social ontology sets out to map a generalised account of the nature of money—a set of nom- inal properties that an occupant of the money position has and a more fundamental claim regarding the importance of the organisational position, which the occupant oc- cupies within a broader system of communities (as Lawson uses this term). Given Lawson also argues this is community specific and that an occupier of the position can make a difference to the position, as well as be more or less successful in the position, then there seems a great deal more that needs to be said to turn the social ontology of money—as conceived—into an explanation of money and its significance within and for the broader system. Put another way, Lawson’s social ontology of money is not exhaustive of the social reality of money. This is particularly so since reality involves processes and thus change, which allows for—as the example of cryptocurrency and stablecoin illustrates—cases that do not quite fit with former categories, and for tran- sitions and transformations, and there is no reason why this cannot apply to organisa- tional forms that give rise to an identifiable money position as much as it does to the occupant of the money position.
Concomitantly, there are conceptual debates that might be had in the interest of consistency—the meaning and use of the term ‘currency’, the relative merits of the term ‘medium of exchange’ versus ‘means of payment’, use of terms such as ‘moneyness’ and so on. Moneyness, for example, is a term that might imply rela- tional properties (of the organising process) are being attributed to things (occu- pants) and in this sense moneyness might seem a confusion. But one could equally

57 Arguably credit theorists are on stronger footing with the first point, if we accept that if a money is is- sued, it is issued as someone’s liability (e.g. a central bank or retail bank) and in the form of a credit with some form of guarantee. For it to be other than this then ‘money’ would be being used in a different context of meaning and practice, though that would seem to be Lawson’s point (other situations of positioning are possible even if not actual).
58 One might argue that Lawson’s social positioning theory brings a degree of consistency and clarity to
claims that money is historical. It is historical in the sense that a money position has to be constituted i.e., an operative ‘money’ emerges as a community practice—an anonymous, widely accepted, easily transferred, general means of payment. But, more contentiously, it is also historical insofar as different things can, in principle, be adopted to take the money position.
 
argue that since an occupant can be more or less successful as a positioned money in terms of achieving given functions and an occupant can be specific to particular positioned contexts, then ‘moneyness’ is a reasonable term to use in relation to a tax- onomy of occupants of the money position. Money hierarchy is another term whose received meaning sits awkwardly with Lawson’s approach, since it might seem to imply a multitude of money positions. Still, whether there are variants of the money position and different orders of dependability and contexts of use is surely an em- pirical matter rather than merely a problem of conflation or confusion of a common governing set of concepts. It still makes sense to ask questions of a hierarchy of money occupants (e.g., in what sense is ‘shadow money’ a money?) and to reflect on relative functionality (the moneyness of Bitcoin compared to Tether, the moneyness of the Rouble compared to the US Dollar) etc.
To be clear, Lawson’s argument intends to bring clarity, avoid conflations or confu- sions and orient or support further inquiry. It allows for application and variation and so it would be unsympathetic to critique Lawson’s social positioning theory of money for what it does not set out to do.59 Rather its limits are indicative that not all of the interesting theoretical and empirical questions regarding the importance of money and finance reduce to or can be answered by philosophy and we conclude with some brief elaboration of current issues invoked by cryptocurrency and stablecoin.

8.	Conclusion: the future of money or money in a society that has a future?
The very fact there is widespread interest in whether some version of cryptocurrency is the future of money tells us something about money more generally, money changes with and, in turn, allows changes in, society and economy, and this remains the case even if we assume the social reality of money begins with a social ontology discussed in terms of what is ‘allocated’ to the ‘money position’. The five issue-areas we have dis- cussed make it clear that cryptocurrency and stablecoin have scope to affect, directly or indirectly, every aspect of money, banking and finance. In combination with new tech- nologies, new forms of digital money may change both what we can pay for and how we pay, it may lead to new challenges for existing financing practices and business models, creating concomitant problems and opportunities for monetary and financial policy, in turn calling forth responses from regulators and supervisors. All of these, as Sheila Dow suggests in a recent paper on cryptocurrency, lead to discussion of technological possibilities and technical matters of systems and control, as well as the potential for exploitation, failure, instabilities and crisis (Dow, 2019). As she also points out, the ob- servable inherent instability of banking and finance has given credence to the concept of a ‘monetary economy’, and as she intimates in the paper (and elaborates elsewhere, Dow, 2016), it is one of the great strengths of heterodox economics and of political economy that these resist sole focus on the adequate functioning of systems and reserve the right to ask, ‘what purpose does a system serve?’. This is no less relevant to the accommoda- tions or transformations finance may experience because of cryptocurrency.
Cryptocurrency began as an expression of radical libertarianism, has lurked in the margins of finance (attractive only to techno-nerds and criminals), is currently in the throes of mania and is on the cusp of mainstream acceptance. But the question we

59 For example, what difference does payment infrastructure make and what gives value to money (issues raised amongst ‘realists’ more recently by, for example, Elder-Vass, 2019, 2021, 2022).
 
should be asking ourselves today is not, ‘what is the future of money?’, it is, ‘what role can some version of money play in a society that has a future?’. Our financialised and economic growth driven system has led to societies of debt-dependence, extreme income inequality, and environmental degradation. The UNEP and IPCC, not or- ganisations known for panic mongering, have made it clear that we need to start trans- forming our economies as a matter of urgency. If we do not, we are heading towards dangerous climate change and ecological collapse. As things stand cryptocurrency and stablecoin are mainly being developed within the logics of our current socio-economic system—they are treated as new opportunities for speculative asset formation and trading, as threats requiring solutions that maintain the current finance system, or, in- sofar as technologies bring new potentials, as an opportunity for (faster, perhaps more efficient) ways to achieve existing systemic goals.
Little is being said about how the future of money might be fitted into a system with different drivers—albeit both positive money and MMT are beginning to think in these terms, and anarcho-syndicalists are experimenting with local money. In any case, in terms of digital money and cryptocurrency, what we have at the moment are disparate threads. For example, hand-wringing over the vast energy consumption by cryptocurrency miners that ‘proof of work’ requires, optimistic narratives that foresee a future in which new forms of digital money complement green infrastructures, and embryonic discussion of how a CBDC might provide an alternative to the attractions of stablecoin. All these examples fit within a broader and dubious discourse that finance is ‘beginning to do its bit’ (a position that Andrew Baker deconstructs, see Baker and Morgan, 2021). The points made here may seem like something of a digression rather than a conclusion, but that is itself indicative, since the purpose of the discussion was to explore the main issue-areas the subject has evoked, rather than should evoke. What we actually need is a money form we can use in association with a financing strategy for ‘just transition’, a money technology without the baggage of either eco-modernist ‘technofix’ or financialisation.60 This is by no means an original point, but it is an im- portant one. To use a modish term, if we think of cryptocurrency and stablecoin as ‘disruptions’, these may empower some and oppress others, but without a more fun- damental approach we may all ultimately lose.

Conflict of interest
None.

Bibliography
Ali, R., J. Barrdear, R. Clews and J. Southgate 2014. The economics of digital currencies., Bank of England Quarterly Review, vol. 54, no. 3, 276–86.
Arner, D. Auer, R. and Frost, J. 2020. ‘Stablecoins: risks, potential and regulation.’ BIS Working Papers 905, November. Bank for International Settlements.
Baker, A. 2018. ‘Macroprudential regimes and the politics of social purpose.’, Review of International Political Economy, vol. 25, no. 3, 293–316.



60 For discussion of the problematic business models and incentive structures financialisation encourages see Batt and Morgan (2020); Morgan and Nasir (2021).
 
Baker, A. and J. Morgan 2021. From the political economy of financial regulation and economic governance to climate change: an interview with Andrew P. Baker., Real-World Economics Review, no. 98, 170–203. http://www.paecon.net/PAEReview/issue98/BakerMorgan98.pdf
Bank of England. 2020. ‘Central Bank Digital Currency: opportunities challenges and design.’ London: Author, March.
Bank of England. 2021. ‘New Forms of Digital Money.’ London: Author, June.
Batt, R. and J. Morgan 2020. Private equity and public problems in a financialized world: an interview with Rosemary Batt., Real-World Economics Review, no. 94, 83–108. http://www. paecon.net/PAEReview/issue94/Batt-Morgan94.pdf
Benigno, P. Schilling, L. and Uhlig, H. 2019. ‘Cryptocurrencies, currency competition, and the impossible trinity.’ NBER Working Paper: 26214. National Bureau of Economic Research. https://www.nber.org/papers/w26214
Bernards, N. and Campbell-Verduyn, M. 2019. ‘Understanding technological change in global finance through infrastructures.’ Review of International Political Economy, vol. 26, no. 5, 773–
89. [Introduction to Review of International Political Economy Special Issue ‘The Changing Technological Infrastructures of Global Finance’]
Bjerg, O. 2016. ‘How is Bitcoin money?’ , Theory Culture & Society, vol. 33, no. 1, 53–72.
BIS [Bank for International Settlements]. 2018. ‘Chapter 5: ‘Cryptocurrencies: looking beyond the hype.’ 91–114. Annual Economic Report. Basel: Bank for International Settlements.
BitMex Research. 2018. ‘A complete guide to proof of stake.’ Author, 11th April.
Braun, B. 2016. ‘Speaking to the people: money, trust, and central bank legitimacy in the age of quantitative easing.’, New Political Economy, vol. 23, no. 6, 1064–92.
Brown, G. and Whittle, R. 2020. Algorithms, Blockchain & Cryptocurrency: Implications for the fu- ture of the workplace. Bingley: Emerald.
Carney, M. 2018.‘The future of money.’ Speech to the inaugural Scottish Economics Conference, Edinburgh.
Campbell-Verduyn, M. (editor). 2018. Bitcoin and Beyond: Cryptocurrencies, Blockchains and Global Governance London: Routledge
Carney, M. 2021. Value(s). London: William Collins.
Ceeney, N. (Chair). 2019. Access to Cash Review: Final Report. London: Access to Cash Panel, March.
Colledge, B., J. Morgan and R. Tench 2014. ‘The concept(s) of trust in late modernity, the relevance of realist social theory.’, Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, vol. 44, no. 4, 481–503.
Chainalysis. 2021. ‘The 2021 Geography of Cryptocurrency Report: Analysis of Geographic Trends in Cryptocurrency Adoption and Usage.’ Author, October. https://go.chainalysis.com/rs/503- FAP-074/images/Geography-of-Cryptocurrency-2021.pdf
Cunliffe, J. 2021a. ‘Do we need public money?’ Speech given at OMFIF Digital Money Institute London, May 13th. Bank of England.
Cunliffe, J. 2021b. ‘Is “Crypto” a financial stability risk?’ Speech given at SIBOS, October 13th. Bank of England.
CPMI-IOSCO. 2021. Consultative report: Application of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures to stablecoin arrangements. Authors, October.
Davies, G. 2016. A History of Money. Cardiff: University of Wales Press, 4th edition.
Didenko, A. and R. Buckley 2019. ‘The evolution of currency: Cash to cryptos to sovereign digital currencies.’, Fordham International Law Journal, vol. 42, no. 4, 1041–94.
Diem. 2020. ‘Cover Letter and White Paper V.2.’ Author, December. Dodd, N. 1994. The Sociology of Money. Cambridge: Polity.
Dow, S. C. 2016. ‘The political economy of monetary reform.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 40, no. 5, 1363–76.
Dow, S. C. 2019. Monetary Reform, Central Banks, and Digital Currencies., International Journal of Political Economy, vol. 48, no. 2, 153–73.
Duke, S. 2022. ‘Bitcoin could be the new gold says Goldman Sachs.’ The Times, 6th January.
EAC (Economic Affairs Committee). 2022. Central bank digital currencies: A solution in search of a problem? Third Report of Session 2021-22, HL Paper 131. London: House of Lords Economic Affairs Committee, 13th January.
 
Economist. 2019. ‘The issuer of a start cryptocurrency is being sued for $1.4 trn.’ The Economist, 10th October.
Edelman, G. 2021. ‘The father of Web3 wants you to trust less.’ Wired, 29th November. https:// www.wired.com/story/web3-gavin-wood-interview/
Eichengreen, B. and Viswanath-Natraj, G. 2020. ‘Libra still needs more baking.’ Vox Eu, 25th April, https://voxeu.org/article/libra-still-needs-more-baking
Elder-Vass, D. 2019. ‘No price without value.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 43, no. 6, 1485–98.
Elder-Vass, D. 2021. ‘Review: The nature of social reality: issues in social ontology.’, Journal of Critical Realism, vol. 20, no. 3, 322–8.
Elder-Vass, D. 2022. Inventing Value. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Fortson, D. 2022. ‘Crypto crash victims have nowhere to go.’ The Sunday Times, 10th July. Gabor, D. 2020. Critical macro-finance: A theoretical lens., Finance and Society, vol. 6, no. 1,
45–55.
European Commission. 2020. Proposal for a Regulation of the European Parliament and the Council on Markets in Cryptoassets, and amending Directive (EU) 2019/1937. Brussels, September.
FCA. 2021. ‘Young investors driven by competition and hype.’ London: Financial Conduct Authority, October. https://www.fca.org.uk/news/press-releases/young-investors-driven-competition-hype Federal Reserve. 2022. ‘Money and payments: The US Dollar in the age of digital transformation.’ Research & Analysis, Board of Governors of the Federal reserve, January. https://www.
federalreserve.gov/publications/files/money-and-payments-20220120.pdf Galbraith, J. K. 1975. Money:Whence it came where it went. London: Penguin.
Garrod, J. 2019. ‘On the property of blockchains: comments on an emerging literature.’, Economy and Society, vol. 48, no. 4, 602–23.
FSB [Financial Stability Board]. 2020. Addressing the regulatory, supervisory and oversight chal- lenges raised by ‘global stablecoin’ arrangements. 14th April.
FSB [Financial Stability Board]. 2022. Assessment of Risk to Financial Stability from Crypto-assets. 16th February.
G7 WGS [Working Group on Stablecoins]. 2019. Investigating the impact of global stablecoins. October.
Goodhart, C. 2005. ‘What is the essence of money?’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 29, no. 5, 817–25.
Graeber, D. 2011. Debt:The First 5,000Years. New York: Melville House.
Griffin, J. and A. Shams 2020. ‘Is Bitcoin really untethered?’, The Journal of Finance, vol. 75, no. 4, 1913–64.
Goldman Sachs. 2021. ‘Crypto: A new asset class?’ Top of Mind, vol. 98, 1–37 [Multiple inter- views and analyses]
Haber, S. and S. Stornetta 1991. ‘How to time-stamp a digital document.’, Journal of Cryptology, vol. 3, no. 2, 99–111.
Halunen, K. Vallivaara, V. and Karinsola, A. 2018. ‘On the similarities between blockchains and Merkle-Damgard hash functions.’ In Proceedings - 2018 IEEE 18th International Conference on Software Quality, Reliability, and Security Companion, QRS-C 2018. New York: Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, pp. 129–134. https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/ document/8431963
Hamrick, J. T. Rouhi, F. Mukherjee, A. Feder, A. Gandal, N. Moore, T. and Vasek, M. 2019. ‘The economics of cryptocurrency pump and dump schemes.’ Vox EU, January.
Hayes, A. 2021. World monies or money-worlds: A new perspective on cryptocurrencies and their moneyness., Finance and Society, vol. 7, no. 2, 130–39.
Hendrickson, J., T. Hogan and W. Luther 2016. ‘The political economy of Bitcoin.’, Economic Inquiry, vol. 54, no. 2, 925–39.
HM Treasury. 2021. UK regulatory approach to cryptoassets and stablecoins: Consultation and call for evidence. London: Author, January.
Hook, A. 2022. ‘Examining modern money creation: An institution-centred explanation and visualization of the “credit theory” of money and some reflections on its significance.’, The Journal of Economic Education, vol. 53, no. 3, 210–31.
Hosking, P. 2022. ‘Britcoin ‘risk to stability of the banks.’ The Times, 13th January.
 
Ihrig, J. Weinbach, G. and Wolla, S. 2022. ‘How are banks and the Fed linked? Teaching key con- cepts today.’ Review of Political Economy, https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0953 8259.2022.2040906
IMF. 2021. Global Financial Stability Report [Chapter 2: The Crypto Ecosystem and Financial Stability Challenges]. Washington DC: Author, October.
Ingham, G. 2018. ‘A critique of Lawson’s “Social Positioning and the nature of Money”.’,
Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 42, no. 3, 837–50. Ingham, G. 2004. The Nature of Money. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Janssen, A. 2021. Smart contracting and the new digital directives: Some initial thoughts., Journal of Intellectual Property, Information Technology and E-Commerce Law, vol. 12, 196. https://www. jipitec.eu/issues/jipitec-12-2-2021/5293.
Kaldor, N. 1939. ‘Speculation and economic stability.’, The Review of Economic Studies, vol. 7, no. 1, 1–27.
Karim, M. and Tomova, G. 2021. Research Note: Crypto Consumer Research 2021. London: Financial Conduct Authority, June.
Keynes, J. M. 1936. The General Theory of Employment Interest and Money. New York: Harcourt Brace.
Keynes, J. M. 1937. ‘The general theory of employment.’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 51, no. 2, 209–23.
Keynes, J. M. 1930. A Treatise on Money. (Three Volumes). London: Macmillan.
Kindleberger, C. and Aliber, R. 2005. Manias, Panics and Crashes: A History of Financial Crises. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan. Fifth edition.
Knapp. G. 1905. The State Theory of Money. London: Macmillan.
Knowles, T. 2022. ‘Facebook’s Libra Project ends in failure.’ The Times, 28th January.
Kubat, M. 2015. Virtual currency Bitcoin in the scope of money definition and store of value.,
Procedia Economics and Finance, vol. 30, 409–16.
Kumhof, M. and Noone, C. 2018. ‘Central bank digital currencies — design principles and balance sheet implications.’ Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 725, May.
Lawson, C. 2017. Technology and Isolation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lawson, T. 2001. ‘Evaluating trust, competition and cooperation: a realist perspective.’ In Shionoya,Y. and Yagi, K. (eds.) Competition,Trust and Cooperation. New York: Springer, 42–76. Lawson, T. 2016. ‘Social positioning and the nature of money.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics,
vol. 40, no. 4, 961–96.
Lawson, T. 2018a. ‘The constitution and nature of money.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 42, no. 3, 851–73.
Lawson, T. 2018b. ‘Debt as money.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 42, no. 4, 1165–81. Lawson, T. 2019a. The Nature of Social Reality. London: Routledge.
Lawson, T. 2019b. ‘The Nature of Money and Possibility of Cryptocurrency Money.’ In Cryptocurrencies and the Future of Money. IE Center for the Governance of Change, 7–16. https://docs.ie.edu/cgc/research/cryptocurrencies/CGC-Cryptocurrencies-and-the-Future-  of-Money-Full-Report.pdf
Lawson, T. 2022. ‘Social positioning theory.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 46, no. 1, 1–39.
Lawson, T. and J. Morgan 2021a. ‘Cambridge Social Ontology, the philosophical critique of modern economics and social positioning theory: an interview with Tony Lawson, part 1.’, Journal of Critical Realism, vol. 20, no. 1, 72–97. doi:10.1080/14767430.2020.1846009.
Lawson, T. and J. Morgan 2021b. ‘Cambridge Social Ontology, the philosophical critique of modern economics and social positioning theory: an interview with Tony Lawson, part 2.’, Journal of Critical Realism, vol. 20, no. 2, 201–37.
Lyons, R. and Viswanath-Natraj, G. 2020. ‘Stable coins don’t inflate crypto markets.’ Vox EU, April.
Makarov, I. and Schoar, A. 2021. ‘Blockchain analysis of the Bitcoin market.’ NBER Working Paper, 29396, October.
Martin, B. 2022. ‘Regulator still worried over Binance.’ The Times, 17th February.
Martins, N. 2021. ‘Social positioning and the pursuit of power.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 46, no. 2, 275–92. doi:10.1093/cje/beab057.
 
McLeay, M., A. Radia and R. Thomas 2014. ‘Money creation in the modern economy’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol. 54, no. 1, 14–25.
Mellor, M. 2019. Money. Bristol: Policy Press.
Mitchell-Innes, A. 1913. What is money?, Banking Law Journal, vol. 30, no. 5, 377–408. Mitchell-Innes, A. 1914. ‘The credit theory of money.’, Banking Law Journal, vol. 31, no. 2,
151–68.
Moll, I. 2021. ‘The myth of the Fourth Industrial Revolution.’, Theoria, vol. 68, no. 157, 1–38. Morgan, J. 2019. ‘Will we work in twenty-first century capitalism?’ A critique of the fourth in-
dustrial revolution literature.’, Economy and Society, vol. 48, no. 3, 371–98.
Morgan, J. 2021a. ‘Artificial intelligence and the challenge of social care in aging societies: who or what will care for us in the future?’ 92–116 in Carrigan, M and Porpora, D. V. (eds) Post-Human Futures: Human enhancement, artificial intelligence and social theory. The Future of the Human Volume III. London: Routledge. https://www.routledge.com/Post-Human- Futures-Human-Enhancement-Artificial-Intelligence-and-Social/Carrigan-Porpora/p/ book/9780815392781
Morgan, J. 2021b. ‘A critique of the Laffer theorem’s macro-narrative consequences for cor- porate tax avoidance from a Global Wealth Chain perspective.’, Globalizations, vol. 18, no. 2, 174–94.
Morgan, J. 2022a. ‘Systemic stablecoin and the defensive case for Central Bank Digital Currency: A critique of the Bank of England’s framing.’, Research in International Business and Finance, vol. 62, 101716.
Morgan J. 2022b. ‘Macroprudential institutionalism: The Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee and the contemporary limits of central bank policy.’ In Hawkins, P. and Negru,
I. (Eds.) Monetary Economics, Banking and Policy: Expanding economic thought to meet contem- porary challenges. London: Routledge, forthcoming, [Sheila Dow’s Festschrift].
Morgan, J. and M. A. Nasir 2021. ‘Financialised private equity finance and the debt gamble: The case of Toys R Us.’, New Political Economy, vol. 26, no. 3, 455–71.
Morgan, J. and B. Sheehan 2015. ‘The concept of trust and the Political Economy of John Maynard Keynes, illustrated using central bank Forward Guidance and the democratic di- lemma in Europe.’, Review of Social Economy, vol. 73, no. 1, 113–37.
Nabilou, H. and Prüm, A. 2019. ‘Central banks and regulation of cryptocurrencies.’ University of Luxembourg Law Working Paper No. 2019–014, SSRN: https://ssrn.com/abstract=3421417 Review of Banking and Financial Law, Forthcoming.
Nakamoto, S. 2008. ‘Bitcoin: A peer-to-peer electronic cash system.’ https://bitcoin.org/bitcoin. pdf
Peacock, M. 2017. ‘The ontology of money.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 41, no. 5, 1471–87.
Prasad, E. 2021. The Future of Money. London: Harvard University Press.
Pratten, S. 2017. ‘Trust and the social positioning process.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 41, no. 5, 1419–36.
Pratten, S. 2022. ‘Social positioning and Commons’s monetary theorising.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 44, no. 5, 1137–57.
PwC. 2021. 3rd Annual Global Crypto Hedge Fund Report. Hong Kong: Author.
Russell-Jones, L. 2022. ‘One in ten Britons have bought crypto assets despite warnings.’ The Times, 6th July.
Ryan-Collins, J. Greenham, T. Werner, R. and Jackson, A. 2012. Where Does Money Come From?
London: New Economics Foundation.
Sauce, L. 2021. ‘The unintended consequences of the regulation of cryptocurrencies.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 46, no. 1, 57–71.
Schumpeter, J. 1997 [1954]. History of Economic Analysis. London: Routledge.
Seabrooke L. and Wigan, D. (eds.) 2022. Global Wealth Chains: Assets in the World Economy. Oxford: Oxford University Press
Searle, J. 2017. ‘Money: Ontology and Deception.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 41, no. 5, 1453–70.
Segal-Knowles, C. 2021. ‘Stablecoins: What is old is new again.’ Speech given at the Westminster eForum Policy Conference, June 10th. Bank of England.
Simmel, G. 2004 [1907]. Philosophy of Money. London: Routledge.
 
Slade-Caffarel, Y. 2022. ‘Rights and obligations in Cambridge Social Ontology.’, Journal for the Theory of Social Behaviour, vol. 52, no. 2, 392–410.
Smit, J., F. Buekens and S.Du Plessis, 2011. ‘What is money? An alternative to Searle’s Institutional facts.’, Economics and Philosophy, vol. 27, no. 1, 1–22.
Spithoven, A. 2019. ‘Theory and reality of cryptocurrency governance.’, Journal of Economic Issues, vol. 53, no. 2, 385–93.
Wadsworth, A. 2018. ‘Decrypting the role of distributed ledger technology in payments pro- cesses.’ Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, vol. 81, no. 5, May.
Wang, H. 2022. ‘China’s approach to Central Bank Digital Currency’ SSRN, 16th February. https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=4036466
Weber, B. 2016. ‘Bitcoin and the legitimacy crisis of money.’, Cambridge Journal of Economics, vol. 40, no. 1, 17–41.
Weber, M. 1978 [1922]. Economy and Society. Two Volumes. University of California Press. Yermack, D. 2013. ‘Is Bitcoin a real currency? An economic appraisal.’ NBERWorking Paper No.
19747.

